  PART THREE.
            
 MINAS TIRITH.

                                     I.                                    
                                ADDENDUM TO                               
                         'THE TREASON OF ISENGARD'.                        
                                                                         
 After  the  publication  of  'The  Treason  of Isengard'  I came  upon the
 following  manuscript page.  It had  ended up  in a  bundle of  much later
 writings  concerned  with  the  events  of  Books  V  and  VI,   and  when
 going through these papers I had failed to see its significance. It  is in
 fact the concluding page  of the  first of  the two  outlines that  I gave
 under  the  heading  'The  Story  Foreseen from  Fangorn' in  VII.434 ff.;
 and since it represents my  father's earliest  recorded conception  of the
 events of Book V this seems the best place to give it. I repeat  first the
 conclusion of the part printed in Vol. VII (p. 437):                     
                                                                         
   News  comes  at  the feast  [at Eodoras]  or next  morning of  the siege
  of   Minas   Tirith  by   the  Haradwaith....   The  horsemen   of  Rohan
  ride   East,   with   Gandalf,   Aragorn,   Gimli,  Legolas,   Merry  and
  Pippin.  Gandalf  as  the   White  Rider....   Vision  of   Minas  Tirith
  from afar.                                                              
                                                                         
 The text begins in the same pale ink as was used for  the earlier  part of
 the outline but soon turns to pencil. At the head of  the page  is written
 (later,  in  a  different ink):  Homeric catalogue.  Forlong the  Fat. The
 folk of Lebennin' (see p. 287).                                          
                                                                         
  Battle   before   walls.   Sorties   from   city.   Aragorn    puts   the
 Haradwaith   to   flight.   Aragorn   enters   into   Minas   Tirith   and
 becomes   their   chief.   Recollection   of   the   boding    words   (as
 spoken by Boromir).                                                      
  The   forces   of   Minas   Tirith   and   Rohan   under    Aragorn   and
 Gandalf   cross   the   Anduin   and   retake   Elostirion.   The  Nazgul.
 How   Gandalf   drove   them   back.   Wherever   the   shadow    of   the
 Nazgul  fell  there  was a  blind darkness.  Men fell  flat, or  fled. But
 about  Gandalf  there  was  always  a  light  -  and  where  he  rode  the
 shadow retreated.                                                        
  The   forces   of    West   worst    Minas   Morghul    [written   above:
 Morgol]   and   drive   back   the   enemy   to   the  Field   of  Nomen's
 Land   before   Kirith   Ungol.   Here  comes   the  embassy   of  Sauron.
 He  sends  to  say  that  [Here  the  ink  text  ends  and is  followed by
 pencil,  the  word  that  crossed  out]  to   Gandalf  and   Aragorn  that
 he  has   got  Frodo   the  Ringbearer   captive.  (Dismay   of  Aragorn.)

                           
                                                                       
 Sauron's  messenger  declares  that  Frodo  has  begged   for  deliver-
 ance  at  any  price.  Sauron's  price is  the immediate  withdrawal of
 all  forces west  of Anduin  - and  eventual surrender  of all  land up
 to  west  of  Misty  Mountains  (as  far  as  Isen). As  token Sauron's
 messenger  shows  Sting  (or  some  other  object  taken -  the phial?)
 taken   when   Frodo   was   prisoner   -   this   would  have   to  be
 something   Sam   overlooked   [written   in  margin:   mithril  coat].
 But Gandalf utterly rejects the terms.                                 
  'Keep  your  captive  until  the  battle is  over, Sauron!  For verily
 if  the  day  goes  to  me and  we do  not then  find him  unharmed, it
 shall  go  very  ill  with  you.  Not  you  alone  have  power.  To  me
 also a power is  given of  retribution, and  to you  it will  seem very
 terrible. But if the day is yours  then you  must do  with us  all that
 remain  alive  as  you  will.  So  indeed  you  would  do in  any case,
 whatever oath or treaty you might now make.'                           
  Gandalf  explains  that  Frodo  is  probably  not  captive  -  for  at
 any  rate  Sauron  has  not  got  the  Ring.  Otherwise  he  would  not
 seek to parley.                                                        
  The  story  must  return  to  Sam  and  Frodo   at  the   moment  when
 Gandalf   and   Aragorn   ride   past   Minas   Morghul.   ?   And   go
 down to moment when Ring is destroyed.                                 
  Then  just  as  Gandalf  rejects  parley  there  is  a great  spout of
 flame,  and  the  forces  of  Sauron  fly.  Aragorn  and   Gandalf  and
 their host pour into Gorgoroth.                                        
  Part  of  Battle  could  be  seen  by  Frodo  from [?his]  tower while
 a prisoner.                                                            
                                                                       
  With the last part of this text compare the second part of the outline
 'The Story Foreseen from Fangorn', VII.438.                             

    This pencilled  continuation was  obviously written  all at  one time,
  and  it  was  written  therefore  after  May  1944, when  Faramir, whose
  return  to  Minas Tirith  is mentioned  here, entered  the story  of The
  Lord of the Rings: it is new work on the  story after  Book IV  had been
  completed. That the  brief initial  passage in  ink ('Pippin  looked out
  from  Gandalf's  arms  ...')  should  be  separated  from  its pencilled
  continuation by a long interval seems to me so unlikely as to be  out of
  the  question.  Far  more  probably  my father  abandoned it  because he
  had changed his mind about  Gandalf's riding  by day,  and (as  he often
  did  in  such  cases)  then  sketched  out  the changed  conception very
  rapidly (see the Note on Chronology at the end of this chapter).        
    This was followed by a further draft  of the  opening ('B'),  a single
  page roughly written in ink that went no further than  the errand-riders
  racing from Gondor to Edoras. I give this brief text in full, ignoring a
  few subsequent changes in pencil.                                       
                                                                         
    Pippin  looked   out  from   the  shelter   of  Gandalf's   cloak.  He
  was  awake  now,  though  he  had  been  sleeping, but  he felt  that he
  was  still  in  a  swift-moving dream.  Still the  dark world  seemed to
  be  rushing  by,  and  a  wind  sang loudly  in his  ears. He  could see
  nothing  but  the   wheeling  stars,   and  away   to  the   right  vast
  shadows   against   the   sky,   where  the   mountains  of   the  south
  marched  by.  Sleepily  he  tried  to  reckon  the  time,  but  he could
  not  be  sure  of  his  memory.  This  was the  beginning of  the second
  night  of  riding  since  he  had  seen the  pale gleam  of gold  in the
  chill  dawn  and  had  come  to  the  great  empty  house upon  the hill
  in  Edoras.  There  he  had  slept  only  dimly  aware  of  much  coming
  and  going  and  of  the  great  outcry  when   the  winged   flier  had
  passed over. And since then riding, riding in the night.                
    A  pale  light  came  in  the  sky,  a  blaze of  yellow fire  was lit
  behind  dark   barriers.  For   a  moment   he  was   afraid,  wondering
  what  dreadful  thing  lay  ahead;  he  rubbed  his  eyes,  and  then he
  saw  it  was  the  moon  rising  full  out  of  the eastern  shadows. So
  they had ... for four hours since dusk!(1)                              
    'Where are we, Gandalf?' he asked.                                    
    'Anorien   the   realm  of   Gondor  is   still  fleeting   by,'  said
  Gandalf.                                                                
    'What  is  that?'  said  Pippin,   suddenly  clutching   at  Gandalf's
  cloak.  'Fire!  I thought  for a  moment it  might be  a dragon.  I feel
  that anything might happen in this land. Look there is another!'       
    'On,  Shadowfax!'  cried  Gandalf.  'We  must  not  rest  this  night.
  Those  are  the  beacons  of  Gondor  calling for  aid. War  is kindled.
  See,  there  is  the  light  on  Amon  Thorn,  and  a flame  on Elenach;

 and  look  there  they  go  speeding  west,  Nardol,  Penannon,            
 Orodras, and Mindor Uilas on the borders of Rohan. Haste!'                 
   And Shadowfax  leaped forward,  and as  he sprang  forward he            
 neighed pricking his ears. Neighing of horses answered and like            
 shadows flying on a wild  wind riders  went by  them thundering            
 west in the gloom.                                                         
   'Those are post riders,' said  Gandalf, 'riding  from message            
 post  to  message  post  -  bearing  tidings  and  summons. The            
 message will reach Edoras by nightfall tonight.'(2)                           
                                                                           
   This  text  was followed  by another  single page  ('C'). This  was typed
 by  my  father  in  the  'midget  type'  which  he used  in his  letters to
 me  from  7  July  1944  (see  the  beginning  of  no.  75 in  Letters) and
 frequently until  October of  that year;  and thus  this one  sheet carries
 the  story  as  far  as  the  point  where  Shadowfax  passes  through  the
 narrow  gate  in the Pelennor wall  (RK p.  21) -  the text  stopping just
 before  the  name  Pelennor  would  appear  (see  p.  277).  The final text
 was  now  very  closely  approached.  The  names  of  all the  beacons (now
 seven, not six) are here  in the  final form:  Amon Din,  Eilenach, Nardol,
 Erelas,   Minrimmon,   Calenhad,   and   Halifirien   on  the   borders  of
 Rohan.  There  are  however a  few differences.  Gandalf here  tells Pippin
 that  the  message-posts were  at distances  of 'every  fifty miles  or so,
 where  errand-riders  were  always  in  readiness  to  carry   messages  to
 Rohan  or  elsewhere'  (in  RK,  p.  20,  no  distance  is  mentioned,  and
 Belfalas  is named  as another  destination of  such errands).  The passage
 in which Pippin, falling asleep, thinks of Frodo runs thus:                
                                                                           
 He wondered where Frodo  was and  if he  was already  in Mordor,           
 little thinking that Frodo on that same night saw from  afar the           
 white snows under the moon; but  the red  flames of  the beacons           
 he did not see, for the mists of the Great River covered all the           
 land between.                                                              
                                                                           
 On  this see  the Note  on Chronology  at the  end of  this chapter.(3)-The
 leader  of  the  men  at  the  Pelennor  wall is  here named  Cranthir, not
 Ingold.                                                                    
                                                                           
   The next stage  in the  evolution of  'Minas Tirith'  was a  complete, or
 nearly complete, draft  text; that  the page  'C' preceded  it and  was not
 an abortive start to a typescript of it is certain `e.g., the leader of the
 men at the wall is now Ingold).                                            
   My  father  here set  a most  curious puzzle.  The datum  is that  (as he
 said)  he  abandoned  'Minas  Tirith'  about  the  end  of  1942,  as  'the
 beacons flared in Anorien': the story only went 'as far  as the  arrival in
 Gondor'. A single typescript  page ('C')  does precisely  that, and  when I
 first  studied  these  papers  I felt  certain that  it was  the 'abandoned

  opening', but it is clear  and obvious  that 'C'  was developed  from 'B'
  and that from 'A', and in 'A' there is a reference  to Faramir,  who only
  entered the story in 1944.  Moreover 'C'  was typed  with a  special type
  which  my  father  seems  only  to   have  begun   using  in   1944.  The
  emphatically   underlined   words  in   A  'Beacons.   Messengers  riding
  West' certainly suggest that this  is where  those ideas  actually arose;
  but how could they have done so,  since 'the  beacons flared  in Anorien'
  already in the original opening of 1942?  I was  therefore forced  to the
  conclusion that that was lost.                                            
    But this conclusion is  wrong; and  there is  very clear  evidence that
  my father erred in his recollection. The solution lies in a  passage from
  his  letter  of  Thursday  12  October  1944, which  I have  cited before
  (p- 100), but not in full:                                               
                                                                          
    I  began  trying  to  write again  (I would,  on the  brink of  term!) on
    Tuesday,  but-I struck  a most  awkward error  (one or  two days)  in the
    synchronization,  v.  important  at  this  stage,  of movements  of Frodo
    and  the  others,  which  has cost  labour and  thought and  will require
    tiresome  small  alterations in  many chapters;  but at  any rate  I have
    actually began Book Five (and last: about 10 chapters per 'book').     
                                                                          
  I had taken (in view of what he said years later) the  words that  I have
  italicised to  mean that  my father  had begun  'Minas Tirith'  anew, and
  supposed that in this brief reference he simply passed over the fact that
  the  beginning  of  the  chapter  (and  the beginning  of 'The  Muster of
  Rohan') was long since in existence - or else that the  earlier beginning
  had  now  been  rejected  and  set  aside.  But the  words are  much more
  naturally  taken  to  mean  what they  say: 'I  have actually  begun Book
  Five'- on 10 October 1944, ab initio; and if they are so taken the entire
  problem disappears. The abandoned opening is not lost,  and it  is indeed
  the curious isolated page 'C'  in 'midget  type'; but  it was  written in
  1944, not 1942.  The page  'A', preceding  'B' and  'C', is  indeed where
  the ideas of the beacons  and the  westbound errand-riders  first emerged
  -  and since  it was  written in  1944 the  appearance of  Faramir repre-
  sents no difficulty.  Thus in  his letter  of 29  November 1944  cited on
  p.  219  my father  could say  that 'Book  Five and  Last opens  with the
  ride  of  Gandalf  to  Minas  Tirith  ...  Some  of  this  is  written or
  sketched': it had been 'written or sketched' in the previous month.      
    The reason for this error, made many years later, is  easy to  see: for
  there was indeed  a long  hiatus in  the writing  of 'Minas  Tirith' (and
  'The Muster  of Rohan').  But it  fell not  in the  long halt  of 1943-4,
  between Book III and Book IV; it fell  in the  long halt  between October
  1944  and  the  summer  of  1946  (see  pp.  219-20),  after Book  IV was
  completed. That this  is so  is strongly  supported by  the time-schemes.
  I  have  argued  (p.  141)  that  the  schemes  C  and  D   preceded  the
  chronological  problems  that  emerged  in  October  1944,  while  scheme
  S represents their resolution. All three, however,  deal both  with Frodo

                                       
                                                                             
 and  Sam  on  the  one  hand  and  the  events  in  Rohan  and Gondor  on the
 other;  and  it  seems  therefore  very  probable  that  they  are all  to be
 associated with  the new  narrative opening  at that  time. It  was precisely
 because  my  father  was now,  in the  latter part  of 1944,  returning 'west
 of  Anduin' for  the first  time since  he finished  'The Palantir'  that the
 need  for  all  this  chronological  synchronisation  arose. See  further the
 Note on Chronology at the end of this chapter.                               
                                                                             
   The  first full  draft of  'Minas Tirith'  belongs of  course to  the final
 period  in  the  writing  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings.  This text  was left
 behind  in  England;  but  apart  from this,  almost all  manuscript material
 from  the  final  period  (Books V  and VI),  including outlines  and initial
 draftings,  went  to  Marquette  University  in  the original  consignment of
 papers.                                                                      
                                                                             
                           (ii) The Muster of Rohan.                          
                                                                             
 The  original  draft  for  the  opening  of  'The  Muster  of   Rohan',  here
 called 'A', is a rapidly pencilled text in my father's most difficult script,
 some of which has defied repeated  attempts to  decipher it;  I give  it here
 as  best  I  can.  The  opening paragraph  was rejected  as soon  as written,
 but  it  was  not  struck  through.  It  may be  mentioned before  giving the
 text  that  it  had  long  been   known  that   Theoden  would   return  from
 Isengard  through  the  mountains  to  Dunharrow:  see  the   outlines  given
 on  pp.  70,  72  (written  before  Gandalf's  sudden  departure   for  Minas
 Tirith  on  Shadowfax   had  entered).   In  LR   the  journey   of  Theoden,
 Aragorn   and   their   company  from   Dol  Baran   is  described   in  'The
 Passing of the Grey Company', but that had not yet been written.             
                                                                             
   Morning  was  come  again,  but  dim  still  lay  the  deep dale           
 about  them.  Dark  and  shadowy  the great  woods of  fir climbed           
 upon the steep sides of the ... hills. Long now  it seemed  to the           
 travellers since they had ridden from  Isengard, longer  even than           
 [? the] time of their weary journey.(4)                                      
   Day  again  was  fading.  Dim  lay  the  high  dale  about them.           
 Night  had  already  come  beneath  the  great woods  of murmuring           
 firs that clothed the steep mountain-sides. But now the travellers           
 rode down a steep  track and  passing out  of the  scented sighing           
 gloom  of the  pines they  [?followed a]  ...... they  found them-           
 selves at the... where it passed into a wider vale. The  long vale           
 of  Harrowdale.  Dark  on  the  right  loomed  the   vast  tangled           
 mass of  Dunharrow, its  great peak  now lost  to sight,  for they           
 were  crawling at  its feet.  Lights twinkled  before them  on the           
 other  side of  the valley,  across the  river Snowborn (5) white and           
 fuming on its stones. They were come at  last at  the end  of many           
 days to the old mountain  homes of  folk forgotten  - to  the Hold           

 of  Dunharrow.  Long  it  seemed since  they rode  from Isengard.
 [?It was] ... days since they rode from  Isengard, but  it seemed
 ...,  with little  else but  weary riding.  So King  Theoden came
 back to his people.                                             
   As dusk fell they came to the river and  the old  stone bridges
 that [?were  there]. There  they sounded  a horn.  Horns answered
 gladly  from  above.  Now they  climbed up  a winding  path which
 brought them slowly up to a wide upland field  set back  into the
 side  of  the  great  [?bones of  Dunharrow. Treeclad  walls half
 embraced  it].(6) The  Snowborn  issued  and   fell  down   with  a
 waterfall. The rock behind was full of caves that had  been bored
 and cut with great  labour in  the rock  walls. Legend  said that
 here was a dwelling and a [?holy] place of  forgotten men  in the
 Dark  Years  -  [?  before ever]  the ships  came to  Belfalas or
 Gondor  was  built.  What  had  become  of  them?  Vanished, gone
 away,  to  mingle  with  the  people  of Dunland  or the  folk of
 Lebennin by the sea. Here  the Eorlingas  had made  a stronghold,
 but they were not a mountain folk,  and as  the days  grew better
 while Sauron was far  away they  passed down  the vale  and built
 Edoras at the north of Harrowdale.  But ever  they kept  the Hold
 of Dunharrow as a refuge.  There still  dwelt some  folk reckoned
 as Rohir, and the same in speech,  but dark  with grey  eyes. The
 blood of the forgotten men ran in their veins.                  
   Now all [? about] the vale on  [? flat]  sides of  the Snowborn
 they saw ... and ... of men, fires  kindled. The  [?upland plain]
 was filled [? too]. Trumpets  rang, glad  was the  cry of  men to
 welcome Theoden.                                                
   Eowyn comes forth and greets Theoden and Aragorn.             
   Gandalf's message tells her to hold assembly at Dunharrow.
   This is not the House of Eorl.  But [?  that is  guarded]. Here
 we will [?hold) the  feast of  victory so  long delayed,  and the
 [ale >] ... ale (7) of Hama and all who fell.                       
   The torchlit stone hall.                                      
   Merry sat beside Theoden as was promised.(8)                  
   Eowyn brings in the cup for the drinking.                     
   Even as Theoden drains it the messenger comes.                
   Aragorn  had  already  arrived  and  greets  King Theoden (9) side
 by side with Eowyn.                                             
   Halbarad  sister-son  of  Denethor.(10) He  asks for  ten thousand
 spears at once.                                                 
   Men are  [? gathering]  in the  East beyond  the Inland  Sea of
 Nurnen,  and  far  north.  Eventually  they  may  assail  the East

 
                                                                         
 Emnet, but that would not  come yet.  Now Orcs  have passed              
 south through Nargil pass in the Southland beyond [? River]              
 Harnen.(11)                                                                 
                                                                         
  I  postpone  discussion of  this earliest  conception of  Harrowdale and
 the Hold  of Dunharrow  to the  end of  the next  version. This,  which I
 will call 'B', began as a fully articulated narrative in ink and in clear
 script, but  swiftly collapsed.  The opening  passage was  much corrected
 both at the time of writing and subsequently; I give it here as  it seems
 to have stood when my father abandoned it.                               
                                                                         
  Day  was  fading.  The  high   valley  grew   dim  about   them.  Night
 had   already   come   beneath  the   murmuring  firwood   that  clothed
 the  steep  mountain-sides.  Their  path  turning  a  sharp  shoulder of
 rock  plunged  down  into  the  sighing  gloom  under  dark   trees.  At
 last  they  came  out  again  and  saw  that it  was evening,  and their
 journey  was  nearly  at  an  end.  They  had  come  down  to  the  edge
 of  the  mountain-stream,  which  all  day  they  had  followed  as  far
 below  it  clove  its  deep  path  between  the  tree-clad   walls.  And
 now   through   a   narrow   gate  between   the  mountains   it  passed
 out, and flowed into a wider vale.                                       
  'At last! ' said Eomer. 'We are come                                    
                                                                         
 Here  my  father  stopped.  Perhaps  at  once,  he  added  in  pencil 'to
 Harrowdale',  then struck  out Eomer's  words and  continued the  text in
 pencil,  which  soon  becomes  difficult  to  read,  and finally  as nearly
 impossible as text A.                                                    
                                                                         
 They  followed  it,  and  saw  the  Snowborn white  and fuming           
 upon its stones rush down upon its swift journey to  Edoras at           
 the mountains' feet. To their right, now  dark and  swathed in           
 cloud, loomed the vast  tumbled mass  of great  Dunharrow, but           
 his/its tall peak and cap of snow they could not see, for they           
 were crawling under the shadow of his  knees. Across  the dale           
 before them lights were twinkling.                                       
  'Long now it  seems since  we rode  from Isengard  about this           
 hour of the  day,' said  Theoden. 'We  have journeyed  by dusk           
 and night and by day among the hills, and I have lost count of           
 time. But was not the moon full last night?'                             
  'Yes,' said Aragorn. '[Five >]  Four days  have we  passed on           
 the road, and now six remain before the day that you appointed           
 for the assembly at Edoras.'                                             
  'Then here at Dunharrow maybe we can rest a while,'  said the           
 King.                                                                    
  They came now [?under] dusk over a  stone bridge  across the           

 river;  and  when  the  head  of  [?his] long  line had  passed it  a man
 sounded  a  loud  call  upon  [a]  horn.  It  echoed  in the  valley, and
 horn[s]  answered  it  from  far  above.  Lights   sprang  out   and  men
 rode   forward   to   meet   them.   King   Theoden  was   welcomed  back
 with   joy,   and   he   rode  on   with  Eomer   and  Aragorn   and  his
 company  up   the  steep   winding  path   that  led   to  the   Hold  of
 Dunharrow   on   the   mountain's   knee.   No   foe  could   climb  that
 way   while   any   defended   it  from   above.  [Looking   back]  Merry
 was  riding  now  on   a  pony   furnished  for   him  at   Helm's  Deep.
 With   him   [?   went]  Legolas   and  Gimli.   They  looked   back  and
 long  after  they  had  climbed  high  they  could  descry  in  the  grey
 dusk  below  the  long  winding  line  of  the  Riders  of   Rohan  still
 crossing   by   the   bridge.   Many  men   had  followed   Theoden  from
 Westfold.                                                                
   So  at  last  they  came  to  the   Hold  -   the  mountain   homes  of
 long   forgotten   folk.   Dim   legends   only   now   remembered  them.
 Here   they   had  dwelt   [and  had   made  a   dark  temple   a  temple
 and  holy  place  in  the  Dark  Years]  in  fear  under  the  shadow  of
 the  Dark  Years,  before  ever  a  ship  came  to  Belfalas   or  Gondor
 of  the  Kings  was  built.  That  was  in the  first [?reign]  of Sauron
 the  [?Great]  when  Baraddur  first  was  founded,  but  they   had  ...
 [?him]  and  built  a  refuge  ......  [?that   no  enemy]   could  take.
 There  was  a  wide   upland  [field   >  ?slope]   set  back   into  the
 mountain   -   the   lap   of   Dunharrow.    Arms   of    the   mountain
 embraced  [it]  except  only  for  a  space  upon  the  west.   Here  the
 [?green  bay]  fell  over  a   sheer  brink   down  into   Harrowdale.  A
 winding  path  led  up.'  Behind  the  sheer  walls  of  the   vale  were
 .....  caves  - made  by ancient  art. [?Water  fell in  a fall  over the
 ........... and flowed ... the midst ...]                                
   When  the  men  of  Gondor  came  [?there]  the  men  of   this  place
 lived  for  a  while  [?owning]  no  lord  of  Gondor.  But  what  became
 of  them  no  legend  knew.  They  had  vanished   and  gone   far  away.
                                                                         
   As my father wrote the end of this text he drew two little  sketches of
 the  Hold  of  Dunharrow,  and  this page  is reproduced  on p.  239 (see
 also note  6). These  sketches show  his earliest  imagining of  the Hold
 very clearly: a natural 'amphitheatre'  with caves  in the  further rock-
 wall,  and  a  stream  (in  text A  stated to  be the  Snowbourn) falling
 down  from  the  heights  behind  and  over  the  central   door,  thence
 crossing  the  open  space  ('the  lap of  Dunharrow') and  falling again
 over the lower cliff up which the path climbs. It is less easy to be sure
 of the  situation of  the Hold  in relation  to Harrowdale.  When Theoden
 and  his  company  enter  the  dale  'the  vast  tumbled  mass  of  great

 (Dunharrow.)

 Dunharrow' is on their  right; Dunharrow  is the  name of  the mountain
 (on  the First  Map, IV(E), VII.319, 'Dunharrow'  is written  against the
 mountain  at the  head of  the great  valley extending  south-west from
 Edoras).  They  crossed  the  Snowbourn  by a  stone bridge;  the path,
 steep and winding,  then led  them up  to the  Hold 'on  the mountain's
 knee'; and the 'amphitheatre' was open  to the  west. The  most natural
 interpretation  is  that  the  Hold was  on the  far (eastern)  side of
 Harrowdale, and near the head of the valley.                           
   The references in A to the Hold  having been  preserved as  a refuge,
 and  to 'the  torchlit stone  hall' in  which the  feast was  held, are
 explained and expanded in subsequent texts.                            
                                                                       
   Text B was followed, no doubt immediately, by a third  version ('C'),
 clearly written in ink, which however  again stops  at the  same point.
 Here  the  entry of  the Riders  into Harrowdale  is described  in very
 much the same way as it is in B:                                       
                                                                       
 They  followed  it  [the  mountain-stream]  and saw  it spring  with a
 last  leap  into  the  Snowbourn River  that white  and fuming  on its
 stones  rushed  down  upon  its  swift  journey  to Edoras  far below.
 To  their  right,  dark  and  swathed  in   cloud,  loomed   the  vast
 tumbled  mass  of  great  Dunharrow,  but  its  peak  and cap  of snow
 they  could  not  see,  for  they  were crawling  under the  shadow of
 its  knees.  Across  the  valley  upon  the mountain-side  lights were
 twinkling.                                                             
                                                                       
   It  was now  Eomer, not  Aragorn, who  replied to  Theoden's question
 'But was it not the full moon last night?'; for Aragorn was no longer a
 member of the King's company.                                          
                                                                       
   'No,  the  night  before,'  said  Eomer.  'Five  days we  have passed
 on  the  road:  it  has  been  slow  since  we  took  to  the mountain-
 paths;  five  days  remain  until the  day that  you appointed  for the
 muster at Edoras.'                                                     
   'Then  here  at  Dunharrow  maybe  we  can  rest  a while,'  said the
 King.                                                                  
   'If  you  would  take  my  counsel,  lord,'  said  Eomer,  'you would
 remain  here  until  the  war  that  threatens  is  over, lost  or won.
 [Struck   out   at   once:  You   have  ridden   far  and   taxed  your
 strength in  the war  with Saruman.  Victory will  have little  joy for
 me,  or  for  your  people,  unless  we  can  lay  our  swords  at your
 feet.]'                                                                
   'We will speak of that later,' said Theoden.                         
   They  rode  on.  Merry  looked  about  him.  He  was  tired,  for  he
 was  riding  himself  now,  on  a  sturdy  hill-pony furnished  for him

 
                                                                        
 at   Helm's   Deep;   but  he   had  enjoyed   the  journey   among  the
 passes   and   high  dales,   the  tall   pine-woods,  and   the  bright
 waterfalls.  He  loved  mountains,  and  the  desire  to  see  and  know
 them   had   moved   him   strongly   when  he   and  his   friends  had
 plotted to go with Frodo, far away in the Shire.                        
  He   rode  with   the  King's   company,  and   often  he   had  jogged
 along  beside  Theoden  himself,  telling  him  of  the  Shire,  and the
 doings  of  hobbit-folk.  They  had  got  on  well   together,  although
 much  of  Merry's  language   was  hard   for  Theoden   to  understand.
 But  all  the  same,  and  in  spite  of  the  honour,  he  was  lonely,
 especially  at  the  day's  end.  Aragorn  had   ridden  on   far  ahead
 with  the  swifter  riders,  taking  Legolas  and  Gimli; and  he missed
 Pippin deeply. The fellowship seemed now altogether scattered.          
  They   came   now  in   the  dusk   to  a   stone  bridge   across  the
 Snowbourn ...                                                           
                                                                        
  It would be  interesting to  know why  (at this  stage in  the develop-
 ment of  the narrative,  when they  would all  meet again  at Dunharrow)
 Aragorn  with  Legolas  and  Gimli and  others went  on ahead  (see note
 9), but no explanation is given.                                        
  Text C now follows B very closely,  and is  largely identical  with it.
 The  mention  of  Legolas  and  Gimli  riding  with  Merry is  of course
 removed. Of the ancient men  of Dunharrow  it is  said that  'their name
 was lost', and that here they 'had their refuge and hidden fane'; 'those
 were  the  days when  Sauron first  was lord,  and Baraddur  was founded;
 but they had not  served him,  making here  a refuge  that no  foe could
 take.' The 'wide upland slope' is  again named  'the Lap  of Dunharrow',
 and it is again said to open on the west; 'There there was a sheer brink
 that  fell some  hundreds of  feet down  to the  Snowbourn. Up  this the
 winding  path  climbed.  Inside  the  amphitheatre  (?)  was  clasped by
 sheer walls of rock rising at  the back  to a  great precipice;  and the
 walls'                                                                  
  Here text C stops; there is thus no mention here of the  falling stream
 referred to in A (where it is actually  the Snowbourn)  and B  and shown
 on one of the accompanying  sketches, nor  of the  relations of  the men
 of Dunharrow with the men of Gondor.                                    
                                                                        
 A fourth text ('D') followed, in which the actual  words of  the opening
 of 'The Muster of Rohan'  in RK  were quite  closely approached  for the
 most part, but this extends no further than a  single page,  ending with
 Merry's 'listening to the noise of water, the murmur of dark  trees, the
 crack of stone, and  the vast  waiting silence  that brooded  behind all
 sound.' The most notable  feature of  this brief  text is  the following
 passage:                                                                

 To  their  right,  dark  and   swathed  in   cloud,  loomed   the  vast
 tumbled   mass   of   [struck   out   immediately:  great   Du]  mighty
 Starkhorn,  [struck  out:  the  grim  mountain,]  but  its  gnarled and
 jagged  peak  they  could  not see,  for they  were crawling  under the
 shadow  of  its  knees. Across  the valley  upon the  lap of  the great
 mountain lights were twinkling.                                        
                                                                       
   At this point,  it is  clear, the  great mountain  'Dunharrow' became
 the  Starkhorn,  and  though  the text  does not  extend far  enough to
 make  the matter  certain the  last sentence  of this  extract suggests
 strongly (especially from the use of the word 'lap')  that the  Hold of
 Dunharrow, in which lights were  twinkling, was  situated on  the lower
 slopes of the Starkhorn.                                               
                                                                       
   The next stage seems to have been two  pages of  notes in  very rapid
 pencil ('E'), some but not all of which my father overwrote  clearly in
 ink, and against some names and words putting queries.                 
                                                                       
   When  the  Eorlingas  came  first  to  Dun  Harrow  they   had  found
 only  one  old  man living  in a  cave, speaking  in a  strange tongue.
 None   could   understand   him.   Often   he   spoke  and   seemed  to
 desire  to  tell  them  something, but  he died  before any  could read
 his words. Where were all the rest of his folk?                        
   Aragorn  and  Eowyn  meet  the  King.  They   say  that   Riders  are
 mustering    at   Dun    Harrow   -    Gandalf's   command:    he   had
 passed  by  Edoras  some  days  ago.  Many  have  already  come   in  -
 and  many  strange  folk.  I  do  not  ....   understand  how,   but  a
 summons   went   forth   long   ago.   Rangers   have  come   and  Dun-
 landers and messengers from the Woodmen of Mirkwood.                   
   They  say  that  but  for  the  shadow  of  the  new  war  they would
 make  a  feast  of  victory.  Even  so  they  will  feast  and  rejoice
 because of the King's return.                                          
   Torchlit stone hall.                                                 
   Merry sat beside Theoden as promised.                                
                                                                       
 The following was overwritten in  ink, apparently  only to  clarify the
 pencilled text (parts of which can be made out), not to alter or expand
 it.  Several  of  the  names  have  queries  against  them  in  the ink
 overwriting,  and  some  of  the  pencilled words  my father  could not
 interpret.                                                             
                                                                       
   Eowyn bears wine to him, bidding him drink and be glad.              
   Even as Theoden drinks the cup, the messenger of Minas               
 Tirith arrives.? Barahir ? Halbarad.                                   

   He  asks  for  ten thousand  spears at  once! The  Swertings have
 come.  The  forces of  Sauron have  crossed the  Nargul ?  Pass and
 raised  the  men  of  Harad and  of ?  Umbor. A  fleet has  put out
 from  the Havens  of Umbor  - once  Gondor's, but  long lost  - and
 sailed  up  the  Anduin  and  reached  Anarion,  at  the  same time
 more  enemies  have  crossed  the  river  and  taken  the  fords of
 Osgiliath again - won back hardly  in the  winter. [In  margin, ink
 over  pencil:]  Swertings  are  only  just moving,  and a  few pre-
 liminary  ravages  of  Lebennin.  Spies  report  a  great  fleet  ?
 [concluding pencilled words were illegible]                      
   Theoden  replies  that  that  is  more  than  he could  have mus-
 tered in a ? [pencilled word  was illegible]  at his  height, and
 before the war with Saruman.                                      
   Eowyn  says  that  women must  ride now,  as they  did in  a like
 evil  time  in  the  days  of  Brego  son  of  [mark  showing  name
 omitted]  Eorl's  son,  when  the wild  men of  the East  came from
 the Inland Sea into the Eastemnet.                                
   [Pencilled  text  struck  through  and not  ovewritten:] Theoden
 decides to pass over the [struck out: Rath] Scada pass to  the vale
 of Blackroot into Lebennin and fall on enemy in rear.             
   [Ink  over  pencil:] Aragorn  [in margin:  Eomer?] begs  leave to
 take a force over the Scada Pass and fall on  the enemy's  rear. 'I
 will  go  with  you  in my  brother's stead'  said Eowyn  [added: to
 King Theoden].                                                    
   [Ink  text  original:)  As  had  been  promised him  at Isengard,
 Merry  sat  beside  [written  above:  near]  the  King  himself. On
 either  side  of  the  King  were  Eowyn  and  Eomer,  and  Aragorn
 beside  Eowyn.  Merry  sat  with  Legolas  and  Gimli not  far from
 the fire and spoke together - while all about rolled the  speech of
 Rohan.                                                            
   [Ink  over  pencil:]  They had  been bidden  to the  King's table
 but said that the lords would wish to talk  high matters,  and they
 wished  to  talk  together.  ?  Legolas  ?  [in  margin:  No,  King
 surely?]  tells  history  of  Dunharrow:  how   the  men   of  Dun-
 harrow  lived  in  the  valley;  how  Dunharrow was  furnished; how
 the Kings of  the Mark  had once  dwelt here  - and  still returned
 once  a  year  in  autumn.  But  Theoden had  not kept  this custom
 for several years. The Feast-hall had  been long  silent [pencilled
 text: But Theoden had not done so for many years].                
   Eowyn brings wine.                                              
   [Ink  text  original:]  Remembering  his  promise   at  Isengard,
 Theoden  summoned  Merry  and  set  him  at  his  left hand  at the

 high table upon the stone dais. On the King s right sat Eowyn             
 and Eomer, and at the table's end Aragorn. Legolas  and Gimli             
 sat beside Merry. The three companions spoke much together in             
 soft voices, while all about them the speech of  Rohan rolled             
 loud and clear.                                                           
                                                                          
   These notes  - very  much a  record of  'thinking with  the pen'  - have
 several  curious  features.  The conception  of the  Hold of  Dunharrow as
 a great redoubt of the Kings of the Mark, with a hall  of feasting  in its
 caverns  (whence  came  the  lights   twinkling  on   the  mountain-side),
 reappears from text  A, and  the last  survivor of  the ancient  people of
 Harrowdale emerges.                                                       
   Aragorn  (with  Gimli  and  Legolas)  has  ridden   on  ahead   to  Dun-
 harrow, as in text C (p. 241); and in these notes is the first  mention of
 the coming south of a body of  Rangers. Eowyn's  reference to  the assault
 on Rohan long  before, when  in the  days of  Brego 'the  wild men  of the
 East came from the  Inland Sea  into the  Eastemnet', is  a sign  that the
 history  of  Rohan  had  been  evolving  unseen. In  LR (Appendix  A (II),
 'The  Kings  of  the  Mark')  Eorl  the  Young  fell  in  battle  with the
 Easterlings  in  the  Wold of  Rohan, and  his son  Brego, builder  of the
 Golden  Hall,  drove them  out. In  the outline  'The Story  Foreseen from
 Fangorn'  (VII.435)  and in  drafting for  'The King  of the  Golden Hall'
 (VII.445)  Brego,  builder  of the  hall, was  the son  of Brytta.  In the
 present notes Brego is the grandson of Eorl, and a blank  is left  for the
 name of his father.                                                       
   Among  other  names  that appear  here, I  cannot certainly  explain the
 queries  that  my father  set against  the first  occurrence of  Umbor and
 against  Nargul (Pass).(13) For Anarion  as  the  name  of  a   region  of
 Gondor  see  VII.309-10,  318-19;  Anarion  on  both  the  First  Map  and
 my 1943  map is  given not  only to  Anorien (north  of Minas  Tirith) but
 also  to  the  region  south  of  Minas  Tirith.  For the  former, Anorien
 appears already in the draft A of the opening of  'Minas Tirith',  p. 231.
 The  Scada  Pass leading  over the  mountains into  the Blackroot  Vale is
 not  named  on  any map.(14) It is  here that  the possibility  first appears
 that Aragorn (or Eomer) will  lead some  part of  the forces  mustering at
 Dunharrow  across  the  mountains,  rather  than  ride  to   Minas  Tirith
 along  their  northern  skirts,  in  view  of  the  news  brought  by  the
 messenger  from  Gondor  (see  further  pp.  252-3).  The   name  proposed
 here  for  the   messenger,  Halbarad   (beside  Barahir),   has  appeared
 already in  the original  draft A  of 'The  Muster of  Rohan': see  p. 236
 and note 10.                                                              
                                                                          
   A new  version of  the narrative  ('F') was  now begun,  clearly written
 at the outset but soon collapsing into a scrawl; in this the story extends
 rather further. In the opening passage of this  text lights  still twinkle
 across  the  valley  'on  the  lap  of  the  great mountain';  Eomer still

  informs  Theoden  that the  moon was  full two  nights before,  that they
  have  passed  five  days  on  the journey,  and that  five remain  to the
  muster at Edoras; and the  Riders still  cross the  Snowbourn by  a stone
  bridge (not as in RK by a  ford), here  described as  'a bare  arch, wide
  and  low,  without  kerb  or  parapet'.  The horns  blown from  far above
  answering  the  blast  blown  as  the  King's  company  passed  over  the
  bridge  now  become 'a  great chorus  of trumpets  from high  above' that
  'sounded in some hollow  place that  gathered them  into one  great voice
  and sent it forth rolling and beating on the walls  of stone.'  When this
  was written, as will be seen shortly, the 'hollow place' was the interior
  of  the  Hold  of  Dunharrow  - in  the sense  that my  father originally
  intended  by  that  name:  the rock-ringed  recess or  'amphitheatre' and
  the great  caverns in  the cliff;  but the  description survived  into RK
  (with  the  addition  of  the  words  'as it  seemed' after  'some hollow
  place'),  when  the  Hold  of  Dunharrow  was  used   to  refer   to  the
  Firienfeld,  the  wide  upland reached  by the  twisting road,  where the
  upper camps were set. There is no  mention (at  this point)  of Gandalf's
  passage  through  Edoras,  nor  of  the  great  encampment  of  Riders in
  Harrowdale  (cf.  RK  pp. 66-7,  and see  note 16);  after the  words 'So
  the King of the Mark  came out  of the  west to  Dunharrow in  the hills'
  the text continues at once with 'Leading up from the  valley there  was a
  road made by hands in years beyond the reach of song.'                   
    The description of the climbing  road here  reached virtually  its form
  in  RK,  and  now  appear  the Pukel-men  described word  for word  as in
  RK  apparently  without  any  previous  sketching.  But they  were called
  by  the  Riders  of   Rohan  Hoker-men   (Old  English   hocor  'mockery,
  derision, scorn') - changed subsequently to Pookel-men.(15)              
    I give the remainder of this text in full.                             
                                                                          
    After  a  time  he  [Merry]  looked   back  and   found  that   he  had
  mounted  some  hundreds  of  feet  above  the   valley,  but   still  far
  below  he  could  dimly  see  a  winding  line  of  riders  crossing  the
  bridge.   Many   men   had   followed  Theoden   from  Westfold   to  the
  muster of Rohan.(16)                                                     
    At   last   they  came   to  a   sharp  brink   and  the   road  passed
  between  walls  of  rock  and  led  them  out  onto  a  wide  upland: the
  Lap  of  Starkhorn  men  called  it,  [rising  gently  beyond  the  sheer
  wall  of  the   valley  towards   a  great   northern  buttress   of  the
  mountain   >]   a  green   mountain-field  of   grass  and   heath  above
  the  sheer  wall  of  the valley  that stretched  back to  the feet  of a
  high  northern  buttress  of  the  mountain.  When  it  reached  this  at
  one  place  it  entered  in,  forming  a  great  recess, dasped  by walls
  of  rock  that  rose  at  the  back  to  a lofty  precipice. More  than a
  half-circle  this  was  in  shape,  [and  its  entrance  looked  west,  a
  gap  some  fifty  yards  wide  between  sharp   pinnacles  of   stone  >)

 its  entrance  a  narrow  gap  between sharp  pinnacles of  rock that
 opened  to  the  west.  Two  long  lines  of unshaped  stones marched
 from the brink of  the cliff  [up to  the slope  to the  Hold-gate >]
 towards it, and [in the  middle of  the Hold  one tall  pointed stone
 stood  alone  >] in  the middle  of its  rock-ringed floor  under the
 shadow  of  the  mountain  one  tall menhir  stood alone.  [Beyond it
 in the eastern  wall >]  At the  back under  the eastern  precipice a
 huge  door  opened,  carved  with  signs  and  figures  worn  by time
 that  none  could  read.  Many  other  lesser  doors  there  were  at
 either side, and peeping holes far up in the surrounding walls.     
   This  was  the  Hold  of  Dunharrow:  the  work  of  long-forgotten
 men.(17) No   song  or   legend  remembered   them,  and   their  name
 was  lost. For  what purpose  they had  made this  place, a  town, or
 secret temple, or  a tomb  of hidden  kings, no  one could  say. Here
 they  had  dwelt  under  the shadow  of the  Dark Years,  before ever
 ship  came  to  the  mouths  of  Anduin  or Gondor  of the  Kings was
 built;  and  now  they  had  vanished,  and  only the  old Hocker-men
 [later > Pookel-men] were left, still sitting at the turnings  of the
 road.                                                               
   As  the  King  climbed  out  upon  [the  Lap  of  Starkhorn  >] the
 mountain's   lap,   and   Snowmane   paced   forward   up   the  long
 avenue  of  stones,  riders  came  down  to meet  him, and  again the
 trumpets  sang.   [Struck  out:   Now  Merry   saw  that   they  were
 blown  inside  Dunharrow,   and  understood   the  great   echo  that
 they made.](18)                                                     
   He  looked  about  and  marvelled,  for  there  were   many  lights
 on  either  side of  the road.  Tents and  booths clustered  thick on
 the slopes and the smokes of little fires curled up  in the  dim air.
 Then  again  the  trumpets  rang,  echoing  in  the  hollow   of  the
 Hold,  and  riders  came  forth  to  meet  him  [Theoden]   as  Snow-
 mane paced forward up the long avenue of stones.                    
   As  they  drew  near  Merry saw  to his  delight that  Aragorn rode
 at  their  head,  and  beside  him  was  a  woman  with  long braided
 hair, yet she was clad  as a  warrior of  the Mark,  and girt  with a
 sword.                                                              
   Very  glad  was  the  meeting  of  the  lady  Eowyn   with  Theoden
 the  King  and  with  Eomer  her  brother;  but  Merry  did  not wait
 for leave, while they spoke together he rode forward.               
   'Trotter,  Trotter,'  he cried.  'I am  glad to  see you  again. Is
 Pippin here? or Legolas and Gimli?'                                 
   'Not  Pippin,'  said  Aragorn.  'Gandalf has  not been  here [later
 >  to  Dunharrow],  but  Legolas   and  Gimli   are  here.   You  may

     
                                                                 
 find them in Dunharrow [later > the Hold] if you  like to  go and
 look, but don't wander in through the  doors if  they are  not in
 the open. Without a guide you will get lost in that place, and we
 might spend days looking for you.' Merry rode on  up the  line of
 stones and Aragorn turned back to the King.                      
  'Is there any news,  Aragorn?' said  Theoden. 'Only  this,' said
 Aragorn. 'The men of  Rohan are  mustering here  as you  see. The
 Hold is  full and  the fields  round about  will soon  be covered
 over. This is Gandalf's doing. It seems that he passed  by Edoras
 going  East  many  days  ago   and  gave   word  that   no  great
 gathering of men should be  held on  the edge  of the  plain, but
 that  all  should  come  to  meet  you  here.  Many  have already
 come,  and  with  them  many strange  folk not  of Rohan.  For in
 some  manner  the  rumour  of war  has long  been abroad  and men
 from far away say that  they have  had summons / a word  that all
 who  hate  Mordor  should  come  to Edoras,  or to  Minas Tirith.
 There  are Dunlanders  here, and  some even  of the  Woodmen from
 the  borders  of  Mirkwood,  and  wandering  folk  of  the  empty
 lands; and even some of the  Rangers of  the North,  last remnant
 of Elendil's race: my own folk: they have come seeking me.'      
  'And you, Eowyn, how has it fared with you?'                    
  'Well,  Theoden  King,'  she  answered.  'It  was  a  long weary
 road for  the people  to take  from their  homes, and  there were
 many  hard  words  but  no evil  deeds. Then  hardly had  we come
 to  Dunharrow  and ordered  ourselves when  tidings came  of your
 victory, and  the fall  of Isengard.  There was  great rejoicing,
 though I thought the  tale had  grown as  it travelled  along the
 road,  until  Aragorn  came  back  as he  promised.(19) But  all have
 missed  you,  lord,  especially  in  the hour  of victory.  It is
 overshadowed  now  by  new  fear,  yet  not   dimmed  altogether.
 Tonight  all  are  preparing  the  feast.  For  you  do  not come
 unexpected.  Aragorn  named  the  very  hour  at  which  we might
 look  for  you.  And  behold  you  come.'  She clasped  his hand.
 'Now I  will admit,  Theoden, brother  of my  mother, that  it is
 beyond  any  hope  I  had  when  you  rode away.  This is  a glad
 hour. Hail, Lord of the  Mark, may  I never  again be  taken from
 your side while you live still and rule the Eorlingas. Father you
 are to me since Eothain my father fell at  Osgiliath far  away. (20)
 Come  now  - all  is prepared  for you.  And though  Dunharrow is
 a dark place, full of sad shadow, tonight it shall be filled with
 lights.'                                                         
  So  they  passed  on,  through  the pinnacles  of the  gate, and

 beside    the    Middle-stone,   and    dismounting   before    the   dark
 portal they went in. Night gathered outside.                              
   Far   within   Dunharrow   there   was  a   great  cavern   enlarged  by
 many  hands  [added  later:  at   different  ages]   until  it   ran  back
 deep  into  the  mountain,  a  great  hall with  pillars of  living stone.
 At  the  far  end  it  rose  by  [?steep  short  steps]  to a  platform of
 rock  that  rose  far  up  above  the  light  of   torch.  There   was  no
 hearth  and  no  louvre  for  the  smoke  that  could  be seen;  but fires
 of  pinewood  were  lit  all   down  the   centre  between   the  pillars,
 and  the  air  was  full  of  the  scent  of  burning  pinewood,  but  the
 smoke  rose  and  escaped   through  fissures   or  channels   that  could
 not  be  seen.  Torches  blazed  on  wall   and  pillar.   Three  thousand
 men  could  stand  there   when  the   hall  was   cleared;  but   at  the
 feast   when   all   the   benches   and   tables   were   arranged   five
 hundred sat that night at the King's feast.                               
                                                                          
   Here  this  text  ends,  and  was  followed,  no  doubt  at  once,  by a
 second version ('G') of the latter part of F, beginning at the description
 of  the  Hold  of  Dunharrow  (p.  245)  and  ending  at  the  same  point
 ('some five hundred sat that night at the King's feast').                 
   While  the  description  of  the Hold  was repeated  virtually unchanged
 from   F   (as  emended)   -  the   'Hoker-men'  or   'Hocker-men'  become
 'Pookel-men'  -  the  story  that  follows  was  rearranged  and  expanded.
 Merry  does  not  now  have  any  speech  with  Aragorn  when  he  appears
 with Eowyn, and it is  Eowyn that  Theoden first  addresses; in  her reply
 she says:                                                                 
                                                                          
 There  were  hard  words,  for  it  is  long  since   war  has   driven  us
 from the quiet life  of the  green hills  and the  fields; but  there have
 been  no  evil  deeds.  We  had  scarcely  come   to  Dunharrow   and  all
 was  still  in  turmoil,  when  tidings  came  of  your victory  at Helm's
 Deep.  There  was  great  rejoicing,  and  many  at  once  went   back  to
 the  lowlands,   caring  nothing   for  rumours   of  greater   perils  to
 come.  I  hindered  as  many  as  I  could,  for I  thought that  the tale
 had  grown   as  it   travelled  -   until  Aragorn   returned,  yesterday
 morning,  even  as  he  said.  Then  we  learned of  the fall  of Isengard
 and   many   other   strange   happenings.  And   we  missed   you,  lord,
 desiring to make merry....                                                
                                                                          
 The remainder of  her words  are as  in F,  but she  does not  now mention
 her father. When she has finished speaking the text continues:            
                                                                          
   Now they rode on. Aragorn. was beside the King, and Eowyn               
 rode beside her brother exchanging  many glad  words. Merry               

 jogged  along  behind,  feeling  forlorn:  Aragorn  had  smiled  at
 him, but he  had no  chance to  get a  word with  him, or  find out
 what had become of Legolas or Gimli, or Pippin.                   
   'Have  you  gathered  any  tidings  by  the way,  Aragorn?' asked
 the King. 'Which way did you ride?'                               
   'Along the skirts of the hills,' said Aragorn. 'Being few  we did
 not take  to the  mountain-paths, but  came to  Edoras and  then up
 the  Harrowdale.  No  enemy  has  been  to  Edoras  or  harmed your
 house.  A  few  men  have  been left  to hold  the walls,  and send
 word if any evil thing is seen in the plains. But the men  of Rohan
 are mustering here, as you see. The Hold is  full, and  the uplands
 round  about  are  covered  with   the  camps   of  men.   This  is
 Gandalf's  doing.  We  found that  he had  passed by  Edoras before
 us, riding East, and had given orders  in your  name that  no great
 gathering should be held on the edge  of the  plains, but  that all
 men  should  come  to  meet  you  here.  Most were  willing enough.
 The  dark  shadow that  we saw  flying to  Isengard was  seen there
 also;  and  it,  or  another like  it, has  been seen  twice again,
 darkening  the  stars.  They  say that  men cower  with fear  as it
 passes, men who have never feared any enemy before.               
   'Not all  your folk  that can  come have  assembled yet,  for the
 Last  Quarter  of  the  Moon  was  the  day  set;  but   most  have
 already arrived. And  with them  have come  also strange  folk that
 are  not of  Rohan. For  in some  manner, the  rumour of  war seems
 to  have  gone  far  abroad  long  days  ago,  and  men  in distant
 countries  have  heard  the  word  go  forth  that  all   who  hate
 Mordor  should  come  to  Edoras  or Minas  Tirith. There  are tall
 warriors  of  Dunland,  some  that  fought  against  you,  and some
 that  never  listened  to Saruman,  hating the  Orcs far  more than
 the   Rohir!   There  are   even  Woodmen   from  the   borders  of
 Mirkwood,  and  wanderers  of  the  empty  lands. Last  and fewest,
 but  to me  not least,  there have  come seven  Rangers out  of the
 North,  my  own  folk,  remnant  of   Elendil's  race:   they  have
 sought me here.'                                                  
   'How  many  spears  and  horses  can  we  muster, if  sudden need
 should come?' asked Theoden.                                      
   'Somewhat  short  of  ten  thousand,'  answered Aragorn:  'but in
 that count I  reckon only  men well-horsed,  fully armed,  and with
 gear and provision  to ride  to battle  far away,  if needs  be. As
 many again there  are of  men on  foot or  with ponies,  with sword
 and  shield,  or  bowmen  and  light-armed  men  of  the  dales:  a
 good  force  to defend  strong places,  if war  should come  to the

 land  of  Rohan  itself.  If  your Riders  leave the  land, then,  lord, I
 should  gather  all  your  home-keeping  men  in  one   or  at   most  two
 strong places.'                                                           
   'It  is  my  purpose  to   hold  the   Hornburg  and   Dunharrow,'  said
 Theoden.   'I   have   left   Erkenbrand  and   three  hundred   good  men
 in   Helm's   Deep,   together   with   many   stout  country   folk,  and
 yeomen   of  Westfold;   and  men   skilled  in   the  mountains   are  to
 keep  watch  on  the   tracks  and   passes  that   lead  from   there  to
 here.  The   guard  at   Edoras  I   shall  strengthen,   commanding  them
 to   hold   it   as  long   as  they   may,  and   defend  the   mouth  of
 Harrowdale.   But   here,   where  now   the  most   part  of   my  people
 who  are  willing   to  leave   their  homesteads   and  seek   refuge  is
 now  gathered,  I  will  leave  the  main  host  of  my  men  that  do not
 ride  away.  Not  while   any  crumb   of  food   remains  will   any  foe
 overtake us here.'                                                        
   'Not without wings,' said Aragorn.                                      
   So  at  length  they  passed  the pinnacles  of the  gate, and  the tall
 Middle   Stone,   and    dismounted   before    the   dark    portals   of
 Dunharrow.   The   king   entered,   and   they   followed    him.   Night
 drew down outside.                                                        
                                                                          
   The  description   of  the   great  hall   in  Dunharrow   was  scarcely
 changed from that in the text F  (p. 248).  The platform  of stone  at the
 far  end  was 'reached  by seven  shallow steps';  and 'two  thousand men,
 maybe,  could  have  stood  in  that  place'  when  no tables  and benches
 were set out.                                                             
   It is interesting to observe that the picture  in crayon  of 'Dunharrow'
 in  Pictures  by  J.R.R.  Tolkien  (1979),  no.  29, reproduced  as second
 frontispiece,  represents  this  original  conception:  the dark  cleft to
 which the double line of standing stones leads is (as  I think)  the 'gate
 of the Hold', the 'Hold' itself, the 'recess' or 'amphitheatre' with doors
 and windows in the cliff at the rear, being in this picture invisible.
                                                                          
   Lastly, there  is a  typescript ('H')  typed in  the same  'midget type'
 as was used for the text 'C' of 'Minas Tirith' (see p. 233); this  is only
 a little longer than the other, and the two texts are so closely similar in
 every respect that I think it certain that  they come  from the  same time
 -  i.e.,  this typescript  of the  present chapter  belongs with  all this
 original  material  for  the opening  of 'The  Muster of  Rohan', composed
 before  my  father  again  abandoned  work  on  The  Lord  of   the  Rings
 towards the end of 1944.                                                  
   It  is  therefore  remarkable that  in this  typescript (which  in other
 respects  closely  followed  the  previous  version   F,  pp.   244-6)  my
 father  had  already  abandoned  an  essential  element in  the conception

  he had devised. No lights now twinkled  on the  far side  of the  valley as
  the   King  and   his  company   came  into   Harrowdale;  and   after  the
  description of the Pukelmen (so spelt) at  the turns  of the  climbing road
  the text reads thus:                                                       
                                                                            
    At  last   the  king's   company  came   to  a   sharp  brink,   and  the
  road   passed   between   walls   of  rock   and  led   out  onto   a  wide
  upland.  The  Firienfeld  men   called  it,   a  green   mountain-field  of
  grass  and  heath  high  above  the  sheer  wall  of  the   valley.  Beyond
  it  was  a  dark  wood  that  climbed  steeply  on  the  sides  of  a great
  round  hill;  its  bare  black  head  rose  above   the  trees   far  above
  and  on  it  stood  a  single  pinnacle  of  ruined  stone. Two  long lines
  of  unshaped  stones  marched  from   the  brink   of  the   cliff  towards
  it  and  vanished  in  the  gloom   of  the   trees.  Those   who  followed
  that  road  came  in  the  sighing   darkness  of   the  Firienholt   to  a
  huge  doorway  in  the  side  of  the black  hill of  Firien,(21) signs and
  figures   were   above   it,   worn   by  time,   that  none   could  read.
  Within  were  vast  caverns,  so   men  said,   though  in   living  memory
  none   had   ever   dared   to   enter.  Such   was  the   dark  Dunharrow,
  the work of long-forgotten men.                                            
                                                                            
    Then  follows  the  passage  cited from  text F  on p.  246 ('No  song or
  legend  remembered  them  ...'),  which  was little  further changed  in RK
  (p. 68); and the typescript breaks off at  the words  'As the  king climbed
  out upon the upland field'.                                                
    What  was  the  thought  that  lay  behind  this  change,  whereby  'dark
  Dunharrow' was now set within  'the black  hill of  Firien', a  pinnacle of
  stone on its bare head, and became,  so far  from a  place of  feasting for
  the lords of Rohan, a place of  fear that  no man  dared to  enter? Perhaps
  my  father  felt  that  there was  too much  likeness between  Dunharrow as
  first  conceived  and  Helm's  Deep:  'There  are  caves  in   Helm's  Deep
  where hundreds may lie hid' (TT p.  134), 'Behind  us in  the caves  of the
  Deep are three parts of the folk of  Westfold... great  store of  food, and
  many  beasts  and  their  fodder,  have  also  been  gathered   there'  (TT
  p.  136). Perhaps  also the  idea that  Aragorn would  pass over  the moun-
  tains  by  the  Scada  Pass,  as  proposed  in  the notes  E (p.  243), had
  already  led  to  a  new  idea,  that  his  road  would  lead  through Dun-
  harrow  (cf.  the  outline V  in the  next section,  p. 262).  However this
  may be, I believe that it was here that my  father laid  aside The  Lord of
  the Rings, at least in the actual written evolution of the narrative, until
  a further year and a half had passed.                                      
    There remains a further difference to notice in this  last text  from the
  preceding  versions.  To  Theoden's  question  'Was  it  not the  full moon
  last  night?'  Eomer  now  replies:  'Nay,  lord, the  full moon  will rise

 tonight four hours after dark. Tomorrow ere evening you shall come          
 to Edoras and keep tryst with your Riders.'                                 
                                                                            
                         (iii) Sketches for Book Five.                       
                                                                            
 I give here first (the most convenient place for it) a brief text of especial
 interest  that  stands  quite  apart  from the  outlines that  follow, those
 being  of  much  larger  narrative  purview  and  concerned  to  work  out a
 coherent  chronology  for  the  extremely  complex   story  to   come.  This
 text is found  on a  single page  torn into  halves and  preserved separately
 among   the   manuscripts   of   'The   Siege   of   Gondor'   at  Marquette
 University  -  the  reason  for  this being  that my  father later  used the
 reverse of one half of  the torn sheet to  draft a  revision of  the opening
 of that chapter;  but the  original text  belongs with  the initial  work on
 Book V  studied here,  and represents  in fact  a very  early stage  in that
 work. It is written in rapid pencil and is in places very difficult  to make
 out, but the  first part  of it  (as far  as 'Muster  in Minas  Tirith') was
 overwritten clearly  in ink,  and so  far as  I can  see my  father scarcely
 altered  the  underlying  text,  his sole  purpose being  clarification. The
 whole  page  was  struck  through.  At the  head is  written in  pencil '250
 miles',  which  probably  refers  to  the  distance  from  Edoras  to  Minas
 Tirith.                                                                     
                                                                            
   Evil counsels for evil days.                                              
              Eomer rides away and the king laments - for the snow is still
 deep and the wind  over the  Scada has  been the  death of  many a          
 man.                                                                        
   Now  it  is  to  be  told  that  King  Theoden  rested a  day in          
 Dunharrow  and  rode  then  to  Eodoras  and  passed  thence  with          
 five  ?  thousand  riders, fully  armed and  horsed, and  took the          
 road to Minas Tirith. Others were to follow.                                
   In ?  five days  they came  within sight  of Minas  Tirith (Feb.          
 15?).                                                                       
   Merry's first sight of Minas Tirith from afar.                            
   The plain below the hill covered with camps.                              
   It  would  be  better  geographically  if  the main  attack were          
 made  to  come  from  the  direction  of  Kirith  Ungol -  and the          
 Swertings only a diversion, which nearly turns the scale.                   
   Muster in Minas Tirith. [Here the overwriting in ink ends.]               
   People  come  from  Belfalas and  Dol Amroth  and from  the Five          
 Streams  of  Lebennin  in  [?Anarion].(22) [?There came] Inram the          
 tall  from  the  vale  of  .........(23) and Nosdiligand (24) and  the          
 people of the  Delta and  Benrodir prince  of [?Anarion],  and the          
 remnants of the folk of [?Ithilien] across the [??vale], and .....          

 from   Rhovanion   .....   men   of   the   East,(25) and Rangers  from
 the  empty  North,  and  even  some  of the  folk of  Dunland. [Written
 against   this  passage   in  the   margin:  King   of  Rohan   Men  of
 Rohan come after the assembly. Only Aragorn rode .. to it.]            
   And  the  counsel   of  Denethor   was  to   retake  the   Fords  [of
 Osgiliath]   and   drive  back   the  Orcs.   So  they   sounded  their
 trumpets  and  flew  the  red  banner  from  the  tower  and   rode  to
 meet  the  enemy.  And  the  enemy  could  not  withstand   the  swords
 of  Gondor,  and  before  the  sword  of  Elendil  they  fled  like ...
 But  Gandalf  stood  on  the  hill  and  [?watched  afar].  Then  comes
 the fleet  of  the  Swertings  [> Harns]  up  from  the  Delta  and the
 Swertings come up through Ithilien.                                    
   They  watch  for  the  men  of   Rohan  who   [?are  late].   Men  of
 Rohan   camp   nearby   and   charge   in   the   morning.   Then   the
 Nazgul come                                                            
                                                                       
   Here the text stops abruptly. In its opening ('Eomer rides away ...')
 it is closely associated with a passage in the notes E in the preceding
 section, where is found  the only  other reference  to the  Scada Pass,
 leading  over the  mountains to  the Blackroot  Vale on  their southern
 side (see pp. 243-4): 'Aragorn [in margin: Eomer?]  begs leave  to take
 a force over the Scada Pass  and fall  on the  enemy's rear.'  Thus the
 present text, where it is Eomer who takes this road, preceded - in this
 opening passage - the  definitive emergence  of the  story that  it was
 Aragorn who 'went  with his  rangers over  the mountains'  (see outline
 III on p. 260) or  'passed into  the mountains  with his  Rangers' (see
 outline V on p. 262). On the other hand, in this  earliest form  of the
 'catalogue'(26) of  the peoples  of Southern  Gondor mustering  in Minas
 Tirith  mention  is  also  made  of men  of Rhovanion,  and Dunlanders,
 and 'Rangers from the  empty North'  coming into  the city;  whereas in
 the notes E (p.  242) it  is to  Dunharrow, not  to Minas  Tirith, that
 'Rangers  have  come  and  Dunlanders  and  messengers  from  the Wood-
 men  of Mirkwood'  (and similarly  in Aragorn's  account to  Theoden at
 Dunharrow  in  the  text  F, p.  247: 'There  are Dunlanders  here, and
 some even of the Woodmen from the borders of Mirkwood ...').           
   The present text seems  then evidence  of a  fleeting stage  in which
 certain important narrative ideas  had emerged,  but when  their poten-
 tial significance for the whole structure of  Book V  had not  yet been
 realised. From the host mustering  at Dunharrow,  intending to  ride to
 Minas  Tirith  by  the  Anorien  road,  a  detachment is  separated and
 passes  over  the  mountains  in  order  to  come  down   swiftly  into
 Southern  Gondor  (and  this is  above all  on account  of news  of the
 great  fleet approaching  from the  South, whose  coming had  long been
 foreseen,  and which  seems to  have been  originally the  chief menace
 in  the  assault  on  Minas  Tirith:  see  VII.435,  437).  And Rangers

  come out of  the North.  These elements  were of  course essential  to the
  story  of  'the  Grey  Company'  and all  that flowed  from it.  But those
  who  leave  the  main  host of  the Rohirrim  are here  led by  Eomer, not
  Aragorn;  and  the   Rangers  come   not  to   Dunharrow,  but   to  Minas
  Tirith.                                                                   
    But if this is so, the stage was certainly fleeting. Apparently, even as
  he wrote  this brief  text my  father began  to move  in a  new direction.
  The Orcs before the  city 'fled before the  sword of  Elendil' -  and that
  can  only  mean  that  it  was  Aragorn  who came  over the  mountains and
  so  reached  Minas  Tirith  before  the  main  host  out  of   Rohan.  The
  marginal  note  ('Men  of  Rohan  come  after  the assembly.  Only Aragorn
  rode ...  to it',  where the  illegible word  might be  'in' but  does not
  look like it)  was obviously  written concurrently  with the  passage that
  it adjoins, since in the sketch of the war  that then  follows the  Men of
  Rohan are obviously not present at the 'assembly' at Minas Tirith.        
    In the conclusion of the text there seems to be  no suggestion  that the
  city was laid under siege. Of course it is very easy to misinterpret these
  allusive  and  elliptical  outlines,  in  which my  father would  pick out
  salient  'moments'  and  pass  over  others   equally  essential   to  the
  narrative  in  silence; but  although 'the  siege of  Minas Tirith  by the
  Haradwaith'   is   mentioned   in  'The   Story  Foreseen   from  Fangorn'
  (VII.437) I think that no siege  is mentioned  here because  none existed,
  or at any rate not in a form significant for the  narrative. The  force of
  his remark  'It would  be better  geographically if  the main  attack were
  made  to  come  from the  direction of  Kirith Ungol  - and  the Swertings
  only a diversion, which nearly  turns the  scale' must  surely be  that he
  had  supposed  hitherto  that  in  the  strategy of  the Enemy  the attack
  from the South was to be the major blow  against the  city. In  the sketch
  of  events given  here the  attack out  of Mordor  is repulsed  with rapid
  victory  by  the  forces  riding  out  of  Minas  Tirith  (which  included
  Aragorn); but Gandalf 'stood on the hill' (of the city) and (if I read the
  words  aright)  'watched  afar':  'then  comes  the fleet  of the  Harns up
  from  the  Delta  and  the  Swertings  come  up  through  Ithilien'  - and
  'nearly turn the scale'. And so here, where  (so far  as record  goes) the
  charge of the Rohirrim in the morning  first appeared,  it is  against the
  attack from the South  that the  horsemen ride.  If the  city had  been in
  anything like a  state of  siege, it  was surely  besieged no  longer when
  they came.                                                                
    Of the  names that  appear in  this text,  Eodoras can  be no  more than
  a casual reversion to the earlier  form. On  Anarion (?)  see note  22. The
  reference to 'the Five Streams of  Lebennin' is  remarkable, since  in the
  first full text of the chapter 'Minas Tirith', deriving from the period of
  renewed work  on Book  V in  1946, Lebennin  is still  'the Land  of Seven
  Rivers'  (see  p.  278).  So  far as  I know,  neither Harns (presumably =
  Haradwaith,  Haradrim),  nor  the   names  of   the  rulers   in  Southern
  Gondor,  Inram  the  tall  of  the  Morthond  Vale  (?  -  see  note  23),

  Benrodir prince of Anarion (?), Nosdiligand of the people of  the Delta,
  ever appear again.                                                      
                                                                         
    There are  half a  dozen outlines  sketching out  the content  of 'Book
  Five and Last' - at this stage my  father was  determined that  The Lord
  of the Rings should extend to one further  'part' only:  as he  wrote to
  Stanley Unwin in March 1945 (Letters no. 98): 'It  is divided  into Five
  Parts,  of  10-12 chapters  each (!).  Four are  completed and  the last
  begun.' It is not easy to determine  the order  in which  these outlines
  were  written  down,  and  though  the  sequence  in  which I  give them
  seems  to  me  probable  other  arrangements  are  possible.   There  is
  however  fairly  clear  evidence  that  all  belong  with  the abandoned
  openings  of  'Minas  Tirith'  and  'The  Muster  of  Rohan'  in October
  1944.                                                                   
    The outline that I give first, numbering it  'I', obviously  belongs to
  the earlier time,  in view  of the  date of  Gandalf's arrival  at Minas
  Tirith: 'Feb 5 or 6'  (see the  Note on  Chronology at  the end  of this
  chapter);  and the  date February  8 of  Theoden's arrival  at Dunharrow
  appears to agree with the third version C and the fifth version F of the
  opening of 'The Muster of Rohan' (ibid.). A part of this text, all of it
  originally written in pencil, was overwritten in ink, but the  part that
  was not is here and there altogether illegible.                         
                                                                         
  (I)     Book V                                                          
      Gandalf  comes  with  Pippin  to  Minas  Tirith.  Feb  5  or  6 [later
    > 6].                                                                 
      Faramir. The allies come in. Urgent messages are sent to Theoden.
      (Messages (27) must   bid  Rohirrim   assemble  at   Edoras  as   soon  as
    may  be  after  the  Full  Moon  of  Feb.  6. Theoden  reaches Dunharrow
    Feb. 8. Edoras Feb. 10...)(28)                                        
      Denethor  only  willing  to  hold  his  walls.  Knowing   war  drawing
    near he has long sent out  summons to  allies. They  are coming  in. But
    the  messengers  to  Theoden,  his  chief ally,  have not  returned yet.
    Gandalf  tells  of  Theoden's  war. Gandalf  and Pippin  on battlements.
    See  shadow  as  Nazgul  sweep  over  river. Faramir  comes on  night of
    Feb.  [7  >)8.  At  same  time  [>  Next  day)  comes  news  of  war  at
    Osgiliath.  Orcs  led  by  Nazgul  have crossed  river. Fleet  from Umbar
    is approaching mouths of Anduin.                                      
      Faramir  supports  Gandalf's  policy  of  attack  by sortie   on  the
    plain.  The  first  battle.  The  mountaineers drive  the orcs  back and
    burn  ships.  But  orcs  [?win  through].  Nazgul.  Minas  Tirith forces
    driven back. Still Gandalf .... [?on] the battlements.                
      Theoden   leaves   Edoras  Feb.   11  with   Eomer  and   Eowyn.  Ents
    drive off the attack  in north  of Rohan.  They drive  back orcs  out of
    west  [?Anorien]  and  [struck  out:  Feb.   15  Last   Quarter.]  Reach
    battle  Feb.  15.(29) Siege  relieved  by  the Rohirrim  and the  allies of
    Lebennin.  Gandalf  comes  forth  and  the  enemy  driven  off.  Theoden

 slain  and  Eowyn  slays  the  King  of  the  Nazgul  and  is  mortally
 wounded.  They  lie  in  state  in  the  white  tower.(30) Gandalf .....
 [?Aragorn]. Cross the  River at  Osgiliath. Elves  and Ents  drive Orcs
 back.  They  reach  Minas  Morgul  and  press  on  to  Dagorlad. Parley
 with Sauron.                                                           
                                                                       
 Another outline, 'II', gives a brief, and increasingly brief, pencilled
 synopsis of each of the ten chapters that were to constitute Book V and
 complete The Lord of the Rings.                                        
                                                                       
 (II)                          Bk. V                                  
  1. Gandalf goes to Minas Tirith. Mustering of forces. War             
 breaks out. Gondor driven back. No sign of Riders.                     
  2. Theoden comes to Dunharrow. Beacons. Messengers a."rive            
 from Minas Tirith. Also from far afield reporting orcs across the      
 river in Wold.                                                         
   Theoden rides on the evening of Feb. 8.(31) Eowyn goes with him.         
 Gamling is left in command in Westfold. The old seneschal of            
 Edoras in Eastfold (Dunharrow).                                        
   Aragorn and Eomer ride to beat off orcs. They come back and          
 rejoin main body reporting that Ents and Lorien Elves have driven      
 back the north thrust. They ride to Minas Tirith.                      
  3. Charge of the Riders of Rohan breaks siege. Death of Theoden       
 and Eowyn in killing the Nazgul King. Gondor destroys ships of         
 Harad and crosses into Ithilien.                                       
  4. Sack of Minas Morgul. Victorious Gandalf [?pursues] on to          
 Dagorlad. Elves of Lorien and Ents come from North. Parley with        
 Mor ..(32) Sauron's messenger.                                             
  5. Frodo from high tower sees the coming of the hosts of the          
 West and the great assembly of secret army of Sauron.(34)              
   Rescue of Frodo by Sam.                                              
   [?This army) goes out, as he and Sam pass into Gorgor all is still
 and empty and the noise of the war is far away.                        
   Gandalf is ambushed in Kirith Ungol and comes to edge of defeat.     
  6. Destruction of the Ring. Fall of Baraddur. Allies enter Mor-       
 dor. Rescue of Frodo by Eagle.                                         
  7. Return to Gondor. Crowning of Aragorn. Funeral of Theoden          
 and Eowyn.                                                             
      The Hobbits depart north. [Struck out: Pass Lorien and)           
      Fall of Sauron.                                                   
      Galadriel's land ruined.(34)                                       
  8. Rivendell.                                                         
  9. Shire.                                                             
 10. Epilogue. Sam's book.                                              
                                                                       
   There is no clear indication in this synopsis or in synopsis I that

 Aragorn  entered Gondor  by a  different route  (indeed in  II, 5  2 the
 reverse seems to be implied).                                           
   This page carries also two notes deriving  from the  same time  as the
 synopsis by chapters. One of these reads:                               
                                                                        
   Gandalf  keeps  back,  not  to reveal  himself. As  the siege  grows and
   the  armies of  Gondor are  pressed back  he looks  in the  Palantir. He
   catches  sight  of  Frodo  in  tower  and then  Sauron cuts  in. Gandalf
   gives a great shout and hurls the Stone from  the battlements.  It slays
   ?  a  captain. Gandalf  is now  revealed. He  rides forth.  Nazgul come.
   [?Host] comes out of Dagorlad.                                        
                                                                        
 Above the third sentence is written: 'Sauron holding  the coat'.  - With
 this note cf. the words 'Episode of the Palantir and Gandalf' in outline
 A for 'Minas Tirith', p. 231. This is the original germ of the  story of
 Denethor  and  the  Palantir  of the  White Tower,  and also  perhaps of
 that of the revelation of Aragorn to Sauron in the Hornburg.            
   The second of these notes is as follows:                              
                                                                        
   The Firien (Firgen) [added: or the  Halifirien] is  a hill  surrounded by
   a  dark  pinewood  (the Firienholt).  In it  is a  great cave,  the Dun-
  . harrow. No one has ever been in the cave. It is said to be a haliern,(35)
   and to contain some ancient relic of old days before the Dark. ?      
    It is 22 miles up Harrowdale from Edoras.                            
                                                                        
 This statement clearly agrees with  the idea  of Dunharrow  that entered
 in the typescript H (p. 251), where the hill, clothed in a dark wood but
 with bare head, is named Firien and  the wood  Firienholt; and  where it
 is  told  that  'in living  memory none  had ever  dared to  enter' Dun-
 harrow.  Perhaps  this  synopsis II  and accompanying  notes immediately
 preceded H.(36) The  addition 'or  the Halifirien'  is not  obviously later
 than the rest of this note on Dunharrow; it  was presumably  rejected at
 once, for in the companion typescript C of 'Minas  Tirith' the  names of
 all the beacons are in the final form, ending with 'the Halifirien on the
 borders of Rohan' (p. 233).                                             
   On the same piece of paper as synopsis II is  a small  sketch-map very
 hastily drawn in ink; this is reproduced on p. 258. At the top is Edoras
 at the entrance to the long  valley of  Harrowdale, through  which flows
 the Snowbourn, rising in the Starkhorn at  the head  of the  valley. The
 distance  from  the  Starkhorn  to  Edoras  is  marked  as 75  miles; on
 the  First  Map (IV(E), VII.319),  where the  valley runs  south-west, the
 distance  between  Edoras  and  the  mountain  against which  is written
 'Dunharrow' is  also 75  miles.(37) About  half-way up  the valley  the path
 taken  by  Theoden  and  the  Riders,  following   the  course   of  the
 mountain-stream,  is  seen  descending  into  Harrowdale from  the west;
 this path crosses the stream before it joins  the Snowbourn  (whereas in
 all early versions of the opening  of 'The  Muster of  Rohan', including

 (Harrowdale.)

  the typescript H, the stone bridge  is over  the Snowbourn  itself), and
  turns north towards Edoras, ending at a place marked  by a  small circle
  but without a name. The circle is enclosed within  two lines  forming an
  oval shape. It can be seen in the original  that the  lower line  is the
  course of the  Snowbourn as  first drawn,  and that  the upper  line was
  put  in  with  a  subsequent  stroke.  However  these markings,  and the
  detached crescent line above them, are to be  interpreted, there  can be
  no doubt that this is the site of Dunharrow; both from the fact that the
  path leads to it, and from the statement in the time-scheme D  (p. 141):
  'Theoden  comes   out  of   west  into   Harrowdale  some   miles  ahove
  Dunharrow, and comes to Dunharrow before nightfall'                     
    As regards the distances, if the  Starkhorn is  75 miles  from Edoras,
  then  Dunharrow  on this  map is  considerably less  than 22  miles from
  Edoras (as stated in the  note on  the same  page, cited  above), indeed
  scarcely  more  than half  as far;  but perhaps  the discrepancy  can be
  accounted for by supposing that it  was 22  miles on  foot by  a winding
  track, whereas the 75 miles is shown  as a  linear distance  between two
  points.                                                                 
    An  explanation  of  this  curious  stage  in  the  evolution  of  the
  geography  of  Harrowdale  can  be  found by  combining the  evidence of
  synopsis  II,  the  time-scheme  D,  and  the  narrative opening of 'The
  Muster  of  Rohan'  in  the  typescript  H.  Abandoning  the  idea  that
  Dunharrow  was  a  cavernous  hold  opening  onto  the  green  mountain-
  field that was called the Lap of Starkhorn (p. 245),  and that  within it
  there was a huge feasting-hall, to be used that very night  to celebrate
  the King's return, my father at the same  time moved  its site  far down
  the  valley  towards  Edoras,  and made  it a  cave or  caves in  a hill
  ('Firien') some 50 miles or so from the Starkhorn.                      
                                                                         
    A third outline ('III') also sets out a scheme for Book V by chapters,
  but does not proceed very far.                                          
                                                                         
  (III)                             Book V.                               
    Ch.  1.  Gandalf  and  Pippin  reach  Minas  Tirith  (Feb.  6  morning).
    They  see  Denethor.  Reasons  for  the  beacons:  (a) news  from scouts
    in  Ithilien.  (b)  news  reached  Denethor  on  Feb.  5 that  fleets of
    Southrons  had set  sail. Gondor  musters its  forces. Pippin  sees full
    moon rising and wonders where Frodo is. No sign of Rohan.             
    2.   Theoden  comes   to  Dunharrow.   Pukel  men.   (Feb.  6   [>  5)).
    Beacons   and   messengers   [added:   morning   6].  Tidings   of  orc-
    invasions  of  Wold.  Theoden  rides  out  on  night  of  Feb. 8  [> 6].
    Eomer  and  Eowyn  ride  with  him.  Gamling  is  left  in   command  in
    Westfold.  The  old  seneschal  of  Edoras  in  Eastfold.  [Aragorn  and
    Eomer  ride  north  to  beat  off orcs.  They come  back >]  Eomer rides
    north  to  beat  off  orcs.  He  comes  back  and  rejoins   main  body,

                                                       
                                                                        
 reporting  that  Ents  and  Lorien  Elves  have  destroyed  the northern
 diversion. They  all ride  to Minas  Tirith. Where  is Aragorn?  He went
 with his rangers over the mountains.                                    
 3.  Great  Darkness.  Faramir  returns  (8).  Host  of  Morghul  crosses
 River  (9).  Southron  fleets  assail the  south of  Gondor (10  [) 9]).
 Gondor  defeated  and  besieged  (10  [>  9]).  Gandalf  in  White Tower
 does not yet reveal his power or ...... [?name].                        
   Final  assault  on  Minas  Tirith  [added:  [11  >] 10  night]. Nazgul
 appear.  Pelennor  wall  is  taken.  Sudden   charge  of   Rohan  breaks
 siege.   Theoden   and   Eowyn   destroy   Nazgul   and   Theoden  falls
 [struck  oat:  Feb.  12].  Aragorn  arrives  (having  crossed  the moun-
 tains  with his  rangers, he  drove off  the Southrons).  Aragorn enters
 Minas Tirith and meets Denethor and Faramir.                            
 4.   [Added:   12]   Gandalf   and   Aragorn   and  Eomer   and  Faramir
 defeat  Mordor.  Cross  into  Ithilien.  Ents  arrive  and Elves  out of
 North.  Faramir  invests  Morghul  and  main   force  comes   to  Moran-
 non. Parley.                                                            
                                                                        
 A  suggestion that  Aragorn should  cross the  mountains into  Gondor is
 found in the notes E on p. 243; in these notes is  found also  the first
 mention of the coming of  Rangers from  the North,  referred to  also in
 the  narratives  F  and G  (pp. 247,  249). The  Pukel-men entered  in F
 (p.  245),  where  they  are  called  Hoker-men,  Hocker-men; in  G they
 are Pookel-men (p. 248), and in typescript H Pukelmen (p. 251).        
 The text that I give next, 'IV', is reproduced on p. 261. This is a very
 battered page (38) of great interest, since it carries what  is undoubtedly
 the  earliest  drawing  of  Minas  Tirith,  around  which is  written an
 outline in faint pencil. The line that runs up to the right of the White
 Tower  indicates the  mountain behind  the city,  with the  name Mindol-
 luin  written  across the  summit. Whether  my father  already conceived
 the 'Hill of Guard'  to be  joined to  the mountain  mass by  a shoulder
 cannot be said.                                                         
 The  outline  reads  as  follows  (with  contractions expanded  and some
 punctuation added):                                                     
                                                                        
    (IV)  Gandalf  and  Pippin  reach  Minas  Tirith  dawn.  Description  of
    Minas  Tirith  and  its  huge 'cyclopean'  concentric walls  - it  is in
    fact a fort and town  the size  of a  small mountain.  It has  7 circles
    with  7  - 6  - 5  - 4  - 3  - 2  - 1  gates before  the White  Tower is
    reached.                                                             
      They   are   challenged    on   the    borders   of    the   Cityland,
    Pelennor,(39) about   which   ruins   of   an   old   wall   ran.  Gandalf
    [?carries   messages]   from   Rohan   and   speaks   some   pass[?word]
    and  they  let  him  by  in  wonder.  So he  rides up  to the  6th court
    and   dismounts.   There  Pippin   is  re.....   They  pass   into  High
    City  (Taurost)  and  so  come  before  Denethor   who  at   first  does
    not recognize Gandalf.                                               

  (The earliest sketch of Minas Tirith.)

   Denethor  comes  out  to  his  [?  throne].  News.  Denethor  has  lit
 the beacons because what his spies tell. Faramir. Boromir.              
   Throne  empty.  Denethor  has  seat  in  front.  He  comes   in  after
 Gandalf  arrives.  He  has  a  secret  letter  from Faramir  (telling of
 Boromir's   death   and   meeting   with   Frodo,   but    not   overtly
 mentioning Ring).                                                        
                                                                        
 This seems to have been my father's first setting down  on paper  of his
 conception of Minas Tirith.                                             
                                                                        
 The  next  two  outlines  ('V' and  'VI') were  developed from  III, and
 are very closely related: they were certainly written at the  same time.
 From the rejected sentence in VI 'He has a  secret' it  is seen  that my
 father had IV in front of him, for in that text appears 'He has a secret
 letter from Faramir'. The rejected  reference in  V to  'Dunharrow under
 the Halifirien' relates this outline to the note on Dunharrow in  II (see
 p. 257). There is thus good reason to think  that V  and VI  derive from
 1944 rather than 1946, and it  is notable  that in  V appears  the first
 glimpse of the story that would emerge as  the passage  of the  Paths of
 the Dead.                                                               
                                                                        
 (V)                            Book V.                                  
 Gandalf   and   Pippin  ride   to  Minas   Tirith  (3-4,   4-5  arriving
 at  sunrise  on  6).  Interview   with  Denethor   -  reasons   for  the
 beacons:   a   great  fleet   from  south   is  approaching   mouths  of
 Anduin.  Also  messages  from  secret  scouts  in  Ithilien  report that
 'storm is about to burst'.                                              
   Muster  of  Gondor  (Forlong  the  Fat  etc.).  Pippin on  the battle-
 ments sees the full moon; and thinks of Frodo.                        
   Theoden   reaches   Dunharrow   [struck    out:   under    the   Hali-
 firien]   (Feb.   5   evening).  Pukel-men.   They find   muster  already
 begun  and  not  at  Edoras.  Rangers  have   come!  Gandalf   had  been
 at  Edoras  and  issued  orders:  Nazgul  crossed  the  plain  (3-4  and
 on  4).  Beacons  are   reported  that   night.  Messengers   arrive  in
 morning.  Theoden   prepares   to   ride.    Gamling   in    charge   at
 Helm's  Deep.  Galdor  the  old  seneschal (40) of  Edoras   in  Eastfold.
 Eowyn rides with Eomer and Theoden.                                     
   Theoden  sets  out  at  nightfall  (6).  At  Edoras they  hear tidings
 of  invasion  of  Wold.  ?  Eomer  rides  off  north  but  rejoins  main
 host  later  with  news  that  the  Ents  have   come  out   of  Fangorn
 and  destroyed  this  N.  diversion.  They  pass  on  at all  speed into
 Anorien.                                                                
   Aragorn  is  not  there.  He  had  fallen   into  converse   with  the
 messengers   of   Gondor   and   getting   guides   from   the   men  of
 Harrowdale had passed into the mountains with his Rangers.              
   Great  darkness   over  land   (Feb.  8).   Faramir  comes.   Host  of
 Morghul  crosses  Great  River  at  Osgiliath (night  of 8)  and assails

  Gondor  (9).  At   same  time   S[outhron]  fleets   come  up   the  Great
  River  and  send   a  host   into  Lebennin,   while  another   host  from
  Morannon   crosses   River   to   north   on   a  boat-bridge   and  links
  with  the  Morghul-host.  Gondor  is  defeated   in  night   battle  9-10.
  Gandalf  in  White  Tower  does  not  yet  reveal  himself.   [In  margin:
  Gandalf  looks  in  Palantir?]  Black  hosts  gather  about  the  wall  of
  Pelennor.  Morning  of  10  Nazgul  are  seen:  men  fly.  At  sunrise  on
  10  there  is  a  sound   of  horns.   Charge  of   Rohan.  Rout   of  the
  enemy.   [Scribbled   in   margin:   Eomer   wounded.]  Theoden   is  slain
  by   Nazgul;  but   he   is   unhorsed (41) and   the   enemy   is  routed.
  [Added:  Gandalf  leads  charge  in  white.]  Theoden  is  laid  in  state
  in  tomb  of  kings.  [Struck  out:  Great  grief  of  Merry.  Meeting  of
  Merry and Pippin.]                                                       
      [Added:   News   comes   that   fleet   is   coming   up  River......]
  News  comes  from  South  that  a   great  king   has  descended   out  of
  the   mountains   where   he   had   been   entombed,   and  set   such  a
  flame  into  men  that  the  mountaineers  (where   the  purer   blood  of
  Gondor  lingered?)  and  the   folk  of   Lebennin  have   utterly  routed
  the   Southrons,   and   burned   [>   taken]   their  ships.   The  fleet
  sailing  up  the  River  is  an  ally! Aragorn  reaches Osgiliath  by ship
  like  a  great  king  of  old.  (Frodo's  vision?)(42) Meeting  of  Gandalf
  and Aragorn and Faramir at Osgiliath evening of 10.                      
                                                                          
 Closely related to outline V is the following text ('VI'), which I incline
 to think was written second.                                              
                                                                          
  (VI) Gandalf and Pippin  ride to  Minas Tirith  (3-4, 4  - 5,  5-6) arriv-
  ing  at  the  Outer  Wall  of  Pelennor  at  daybreak  and  seeing sunrise
  on  the  White  Tower  on  morning  of  Feb.  6.  On  night  of  5-6  they
  see  the  beacons  flare  up,  and  are  passed  by  messengers  riding to
  Rohan. Pippin sees moonrise about 9 p.m.                                 
    Description   of   Minas  Tirith   and  its   7  concentric   walls  and
  gates.  Gandalf   and  Pippin   come  into   the  presence   of  Denethor.
  Empty  throne.  Denethor  has  a  seat  in  front.  [Struck  oat:  He  has
  a   secret]   They   exchange   news.   Reasons   of   Beacons:   news  of
  scouts  in  Ithilien  that  'storm  is  coming';  Southrons  are  marching
  in;  most  of  all  -  a  great  fleet  from  South  is   approaching  the
  mouths   of   Anduin.   Muster   of   Rohan   [read   Gondor)   is   going
  apace- catalogue.                                                        
    (7)    Great    Darkness   spreads    from   East.    Faramir   returns.
  Pippin on the battlements.                                               
    Theoden   reaches   Dunharrow   (5    evening).   Merry    sees   Pukel-
  men.   They   find   Muster   has   already   begun,   owing   to  special
  instructions   by   Gandalf,   who  had   stayed  at   Edoras  on   4  and
  owing   to   passage   of   Nazgul.  Rangers   have  come!   [Struck  out:
  Aragorn  and  Eomer  already   there?]  That   night  the   beacon  lights
  are    reported.    In    morning    messengers   arrive    from   Gondor.

  Theoden gets ready  to ride.  Eowyn and  Eomer go  with him.           
  [Struck out: But Aragorn (after secret converse with Aragorn           
  takes Merry]                                                           
                                                                        
 Here outline VI ends, but the lower half of the  page is  taken up  by a
 map, which is redrawn in part and discussed in a note at the end of this
 chapter.                                                                

                             NOTES.                                      
                                                                        
  1. The  illegible  word  might  be  already,  in  which  case  my father
     omitted  the  words  been  riding. The  word I  have given  as four
     might be read as fire.                                               
  2. The words by nightfall tonight  are perfectly  plain, but  my father
     must  have  intended  something  else,  since  it  was   now  several
     hours  after  nightfall. In  the outlines  V and  VI (pp.  262-3) the
     messengers  from  Minas  Tirith  reach  Edoras  the  following  morn-
     ing (6 February).                                                   
  3. As in  text B,  the moon  rises 'round  and full  out of  the eastern
     shadows'  ('now  almost  at  the  full,'  RK).  -  At this  stage the
     beacons were fired on the last night of Gandalf's ride; in  the final
     form  it  was on  the night  preceding the  last (the  journey taking
     four  nights),  and  so  when  Pippin  woke  in  the dawn  beside the
     wall  of  the  Pelennor  'Another  day  of  hiding  and  a  night  of
     journey  had  fleeted  by'  (RK p.  20). This  sentence was  added to
     the text of the chapter much later.                                 
  4. Possibly  this  means 'longer  than the  time that  they had  in fact
     taken'.                                                             
  5. Here  and  subsequently, and  again in  text B,  the river's  name is
     written  Snowborn,  but  at two  of the  occurrences in  A the  u was
     inserted.                                                           
  6. At this point my father drew in the text a very simple  little sketch
     of the 'upland field' set into the  mountain's side,  essentially the
     same  as the  lower of  the two  sketches on  the page  reproduced on
     p. 239, but without the falling stream.                             
  7. My father first wrote 'ale of Hama', i.e. his  'funeral-ale', funeral
     feast (cf. bridal from  bride-ale, marriage  feast). He  changed this
     to  ...  ale  of  Hama,  intending  some  compound  term of  the same
     sense, but I cannot decipher it.                                    
  8. This is a reference to  Theoden's words  to Merry  and Pippin  at the
     end  of  'The  Road to  Isengard': 'May  we meet  again in  my house!
     There you shall sit beside me ...'                                  
  9. This  contradicts  the  statement  a  few  lines  above  that  'Eowyn
     comes  forth  and  greets  Theoden  and  Aragorn.'  The   story  that
     Aragorn   (with   Legolas   and   Gimli)  had   gone  on   ahead  and

       reached  Dunharrow  before  Theoden  is  not  present  in   text  B,
       which   undoubtedly   followed   A;  it   appears  however   in  the
       time-schemes C and D (pp. 140-1).                                   
  10.  Halbarad first appeared  in The  Lord of  the Rings  as the  name of
       Shadowfax: see VII.152, 390.                                        
  11.  The  Sea  of  Nurnen, the  Nargil  Pass,  and  the River  Harnen all
       appear on the First Map  (Map III,  VII.309). -  The text  ends with
       a reference to Umbar that I cannot decipher.                        
  12.  Eowyn was struck out, and wine!  written in  the margin;  which I
       take to mean that Eowyn was not seated, for she bore the wine.      
  13.  The  queries  might  mean  that  my  father  was  uncertain  of  the
       correctness of his interpretation of the pencilled forms (in the one
       case  it might  be Umbor  or Umbar;  in the  other the  second vowel
       of Nargil, Nargul cannot  now be  read under  the ink  overlay). But
       this does not seem very likely. Both  these names  appear in  text A
       (p.  237),  where Nargil  is clear,  though Umbar  could be  read as
       Umbor.  Umbar  and  Haven  of   Umbar  appear   on  the   First  Map
       (VII.309) and on the  map that  I made  in 1943;  and on  the latter
       the  pass  through  the  southern  mountains  of  Mordor   is  named
       Nargil (on the First Map the name  was pencilled  in roughly  and is
       hard to read, but was apparently Narghil, VII.310).                 
  14.  As originally drawn, a  pass over  the mountains  in this  region is
       clearly  defined  on  the  First  Map:  see  Map  IV",   square  P11
       (VII.314), connecting to  Map III,  square Q  11 (VII.309).  Here the
       Blackroot  rises  in  an  oval lake.  With the  superimposed portion
       Map  IV(D-E) (VII.319)  the  connections  become   unclear,  especially
       since a different convention was used in  the representation  of the
       mountains, but at any rate there is no clear  indication of  a pass.
       The  1943 map  retains the  oval lake  and the  broad pass,  but its
       relation to the First Map is here difficult to  interpret (VII.320).
       Possibly it was to this feature that my father referred in  his note
       on  that  map  (VII.321  note  1):  The White  Mountains are  not in
       accord with the story'. On late maps, as is to be expected,  no pass
       breaks the line of the mountains.                                   
  15.  In  the  Guide to  the Names  in The  Lord of  the Rings  (A Tolkien
       Compass,  ed.  Lobdell,  p.  200)  my  father  noted  of   the  name
       Pukel-men: 'It represents  Old English  pucel (still  surviving as
       puckle),  one  of  the  forms  of  the  puk-  stem  (widespread  in
       England,  Wales,  Ireland,  Norway  and   Iceland)  referring   to  a
       devil, or to a minor sprite such as Puck, and often applied  to ugly
       misshapen persons.'                                                 
  16.  In place of this, RK has: '... a winding line of Riders crossing the
       ford  and filing  along  the  road  towards  the  camp  prepared for
       them. Only the king and his guard were going up into the Hold.'     
  17.  RK  has  here:   'Such  was   the  dark   Dunharrow,  the   work  of
       long-forgotten men'; cf. text H, p. 251.                            

  18.  At  this  point  my  father's  writing  suddenly  becomes  very much
       more rapid and rough.                                               
  19.  Cf.  'The  King  of  the  Golden  Hall'  in  VII.447,  where Aragorn
       says: 'If I live, I will come, Lady  Eowyn, and  then maybe  we will
       ride together.'                                                     
  20.  I think that Eowyn's  naming her  father Eothain  is most  likely to
       be  a  mere  slip,  for  Eomund  father  of  Eomer  and   Eowyn  was
       established  (VII.393  etc.), and  Eothain was  the name  of Eomer's
       squire  (VII.400-2);  but  see  further p.  350 and  note 13.  In LR
       Appendix  A  (II)  it  is  said  that Eomund,  chief Marshal  of the
       Mark,  was  slain  in  the  year  3002  in  pursuit  of Orcs  on the
       borders of the Emyn Muil.                                           
  21.  Old  English  fyrgen,  firgen   'mountain',  the   word  fyrgen-holt
       'mountain-wood'  occurs  in  Beowulf,  line  1393.   -  Afterwards,
       when  the  Firien  had  become  the  Dwimorberg  and  the Firienholt
       the Dimholt, the Firienfeld remained (RK p. 67).                    
  22.  This  name  undoubtedly  begins  with  An,  and  the  word preceding
       it is almost certainly 'in'; equally certainly it is this  same name
       that  appears  below,  as  the  land  of  the  prince  Benrodir. The
       remaining letters  of the  name are  uninterpretable as  they stand,
       but  their vague  shapes do  not exclude  'Anarion', and  this name,
       found  on  the  First  Map (VII.309)  of the  region south  of Minas
       Tirith, appears in the notes E on p.  243: 'A  fleet has  put out...
       and  sailed  up  the  Anduin  and  reached  Anarion'   (see  further
       p. 244).                                                            
  23.  This  lacuna  is where  the page  is torn across, cutting  through a
       line of text. It  might perhaps  be read,  but very  uncertainly, as
       'from  the  vale  of  Morthond  and   his  ...   sons,  dark-haired,
       grey-eyed'.                                                         
  24.  Nosdiligand:  the  second  and third  letters of  this name  are not
       perfectly clear, but can hardly be other  than os.  Without striking
       through  the  first  syllable  my father  wrote another  form above,
       apparently Northiligand.                                            
  25.  The illegible words might just possibly  be 'fugitives'  and 'repre-
       senting'.                                                           
  26.  My father called it a 'catalogue': pp. 229, 263.                    
  27.  These  messages,  distinct of  course from  those just  referred to,
       must have been sent from Isengard or Helm's Deep.                   
  28.  The illegible word might possibly be 'morn(ing)'.                   
  29.  It is not clear whether 'Reach battle Feb. 15' refers to the Ents or
       to the Rohirrim; but  in any  case the  Ents were  certainly present
       after the siege of Minas Tirith was relieved ('Elves and  Ents drive
       Orcs back'; cf. also outline II $4 'Elves of  Lorien and  Ents come
       from North', and similarly outline III $4).  Thus the  original idea
       that 'tree-giants' (see  VI.410), or  Treebeard (see  VII.211, 214),
       played a part in the breaking of the siege survived at least  in the

      idea that Ents were  present in  the last  stage of  the war  in the
      South,  though  this  would  never   receive  narrative   form.  See
      further pp. 343, 345-6, 361.                                        
  30. Cf.  the  notes  given  in  VII.448: 'Probably  Eowyn should  die to
      avenge or  save Theoden.'  These notes  contain also  the suggestion
      that the mutual love of Eowyn and Aragorn should be removed.       
  31. This is the date given in the time-scheme D (p.  182); see  the Note
      on Chronology following.                                           
  32. The last two letters of this name might be read as du, sc. Mordu.
  33. With  this  cf.  the  outline  'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Fangorn'
      (VII.438):  'Then  return  to   Frodo.  Make   him  look   out  into
      impenetrable night.  Then use  phial ...  By its  light he  sees the
      forces of  deliverance approach  and the  dark host  go out  to meet
      them'; also p. 230 in this book.                                   
  34. Cf.  the  outline  given  in  VII.448: 'They  pass by  round Lorien'
      (on  the  homeward  journey),  with  the  later   addition  (VII.451
      note  18):  'No.  They  learn  (in  Rivendell?)  that  Nazgul  razed
      Lorien ...'                                                        
  35. Old  English  haliern  (halig-ern or -aern) 'holy  place, sanctuary'.
      Cf.  my father's  note on  Dunharrow in  the Guide  to the  Names in
      The  Lord  of the Rings (A  Tolkien Compass,  ed. Lobdell,  p. 183):
      'Dunharrow.  A   modernisation  of   Rohan  Dunhaerg   "the  heathen
      fane on the hillside", so-called because this  refuge of  the Rohir-
      rim at the head of Harrowdale was on the site of  a sacred  place of
      the  old  inhabitants  (now  the  Dead Men).  The element  haerg can
      be  modernised  in  English  because  it   remains  an   element  in
      place-names, notably Harrow (on the Hill).'                       
  36. Outline  II  was written  on the  same thin  yellowish paper  as was
      used  for  text H  of 'The  Muster of  Rohan' and  text C  of 'Minas
      Tirith' (the two pages in the  'midget type').  This paper  was also
      used for the time-schemes C, D, and S. See note 38.                
  37. On  my  father's  later  large-scale  map   of  Rohan,   Gondor  and
      Mordor  (on  which   my  map   published  in   RK  was   based)  the
      distance  from  Edoras  to  Dunharrow  (at  the head  of Harrowdale)
      is 16 miles and from Edoras to the Starkhorn 19 miles.             
  38. Outline IV was  written on  the same  paper as  that referred  to in
      note 36.                                                           
  39. Pelennor: see p. 277.                                              
  40. Galdor was preceded by Ealdor.                                     
  41. In outlines I, II and III it is said that Theoden and Eowyn  (who is
      not mentioned here) 'slew' or  'killed' or  'destroyed' the  King of
      the Nazgul.                                                        
  42. Frodo's vision of a ship with black sails and  a banner  bearing the
      emblem  of a  white tree  (FR p.  379) was  added afterwards  to the
      text of 'The Mirror of Galadriel'.                                 

                      Note on the map accompanying outline VI.                    
                                                                                 
 This  map,   drawn  fairly   rapidly  in   pencil  (with   the  rivers   in  blue
 crayon),  covers   the  White   Mountains  and   the  lands   to  the   south  of
 them;  it  is  laid  out  like  the  First  Map  in  squares  of  2 cm.  side. In
 my   redrawing   I   have   numbered   the    uppermost   horizontal    line   of
 squares   09-14   according   to   the   First  Map,   although  there   is  some
 discrepancy,    and    continued   this    numbering   throughout,    where   the
 discrepancy  becomes   much  greater.   This  is   done  deliberately   in  order
 to   emphasize   the   curiously   anomalous   nature  of   this  map   among  my
 father's  later   maps  to   The  Lord   of  the   Rings.  Comparison   with  the
 First   Map   (VII.309,   319)   and   those   published    in   LR    will   show
 substantial  shifts  in  the  geographical  relations:   thus  Ethir   Anduin  is
 further  to  the  east,  directly  south  of  Rauros,  and  the  Havens  of Umbar
 are  shown  as  much  less  far  to  the  south,  and  east  of  Tolfalas.  On no
 other map is this so.                                                            
  I   strongly  suspect   that  (for   whatever  reason)   my  father   made  this
 map   from   memory,   and   that   it   played   no   further  part   in  the
 geographical  evolution;  and  I  think  that  its  starting-point   and  primary
 purpose  was  to   depict  the   region  (pencilled   more  heavily   than  other
 parts   of   the   map)   between   Harrowdale  and   the  source   of  Morthond:
 with   the   emergence   of   the   story   that   Aragorn  passed   through  the
 Mountains  into  Gondor   the  map   of  The   Lord  of   the  Rings   needed  to
 be  altered  to  show  that  there  was  no  pass  in  this  region (see  note 14
 above).  It  will  be  seen  that  the  southern  rivers have  been substantially
 changed,   though   by   no   means   reaching  the   final  form:   Morthond  of
 the   First   Map   is   now  named   Ringlo,  while   the  new   Morthond  flows
 east  into  the  delta  of  Anduin.  Erech  is  marked,  south  of the  rising of
 Morthond,  as   is  also   Pelargir  on   Anduin  (neither   of  which   is  men-
 tioned   in   any   of   these   outlines).(*) Harrowdale   is    shown   running
 south-east, as on the little map reproduced on p. 258.                           
  The  map  as  squared   out  on   the  page   extended  through   five  vertical
 lines   of   squares   east   of   Osgiliath  (cf.   VII.309),  but   these  were
 apparently   left   blank.   Subsequently   my   father   attached   a   moveable
 portion  covering  O13  -  14,  P13-15,  and  at  the  same  time   very  roughly
 drew  in  the   outlines  of   the  mountains   encircling  Mordor,   which  here
 form  more  nearly  a  complete  wall  on  the  east  than  on  any   other  map.
 The   Dark   Tower   is   shown  as   standing  on   a  'peninsula'   thrust  out
 southwards    from    the    Ash    Mountains,   with    Mount   Doom    to   the
 north-west  of  it,  very  much  as  on  the  Second  Map  as  originally  drawn,
                                                                                 
 (* Pelargir was first placed at  the top  of the  delta of  Anduin. On  the First
 Map (VII.309) a pencilled dot within  a circle  was placed  beside Anduin  at the
 point  where  rivers  flow  in  from  east  and  west on  R13: this  is obviously
 Pelargir, and was no doubt entered at this time. Another  pencilled dot  within a
 circle was put in to the east of the original Morthond on First Map Q12 (just to
 the right of the i of Enedwaith), and this is evidently Erech.)                  

 (The White Mountains and South Gondor.)

  pp.  435,  438.  I have  not attempted  to redraw  this added  portion, for
  the  pass  into  Mordor   (here  called   Kirith  Gorgor)   was  apparently
  moved  eastwards  from  the  position   in  which   it  was   first  drawn,
  resulting in a confusion of lines  that I  cannot interpret;  and Osgiliath
  was  now moved  a good  way to  the north,  so that  it lies  north-east of
  Minas Tirith (as  is shown  on the  Second Map,  p. 434,  and on  my large-
  scale  map  of  Rohan,  Gondor  and  Mordor  published  in  RK, but  not on
  my   general   map  accompanying   LR).  On   this  attached   portion  the
  Dead  Marshes  are   named,  but   not  the   Nomenlands;  the   rapids  in
  Anduin  are  still  called  Sarn Ruin.  The course  of Anduin  below Rauros
  was  changed  on the  new P14  to flow  as it  does on  the First  Map (see
  VII.319) in a wide easterly curve, not in a  straight line  south-east (and
  thus  the  mouths  of  Entwash  had  to  be  shifted  to  the  east).  This
  supports   my   suggestion   that   the   present   map   was   drawn  from
  memory:  in  this  one  area  it was  corrected by  reference to  the First
  Map.                                                                       
                                                                            
                            Note on the Chronology.                          
                    (i) Pippin and Frodo see the Full Moon.                  
                                                                            
  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  just  what  was  the   'most  awkward
  error  in  the  synchronization... of  movements of  Frodo and  the others'
  that  arrested  the  progress  of  The Lord  of the  Rings in  October 1944
  (see  p.  234). It  seems to  me most  likely to  have been  their relative
  'positions' at the time of the Full Moon on 6 February.                    
    I think it is clear that the  time-schemes C,  D, and  S belong  with the
  work set out in this  chapter, and  indeed that  they were  closely associ-
  ated  with  the  chronological  problem  that  my  father  had encountered:
  see pp. 141 - 2, 234 -  5. In  scheme C  (p. 140)  Gandalf and  Pippin came
  to  Minas  Tirith  at sunset  on Feb.  5. They  had left  Dol Baran  on the
  night  of  Feb.  3-4,  passed Feb.  4 'in  hiding' (presumably  at Edoras),
  ridden through the night of Feb. 4 -  5, and  then after  a short  rest had
  'abandoned  secrecy'  and  ridden  all  through  the next  day (Feb.  5) to
  reach the city at sunset. It seems likely that the original brief narrative
  opening (A) of 'Minas Tirith', in which as  they rode  'still the  world of
  grey  and  green  rushed  by  and the  sun rose  and sank',  was associated
  with  this  scheme,   and  that   it  was   abandoned  because   my  father
  decided that Gandalf did not in fact ride by day (see pp. 231 - 2).  In the
  pencilled  continuation  of  that  opening  (p.  231)  the  new  story  had
  entered: it is night, two days since Pippin  'saw the  sun glinting  on the
  roof of the king's great house', and the 'third riding', thus the  night of
  Feb. 5 - 6.  They see  the beacons  and the  westbound messengers,  but the
  moon is  not mentioned;  and it  is obvious  that in  this story  they will
  arrive at the wall of the Pelennor  in the  morning (Feb.  6). This  is the
  story  in  scheme  D  (p.  141),  except  that  there  the beacons  and the
  messengers are seen on the second night of the ride (Feb. 4  - 5).  In that

  scheme the Full  Moon 'rises  about 9.20  p.m. and  sets about  6.30 a.m.
  on Feb. 7. Gandalf rides all night of 5 -  6 and  sights Minas  Tirith at
  dawn on 6th.'                                                            
    It  was  a  datum  of  Frodo's journey  that he  came before  the Black
  Gate at dawn of Feb. 5, leaving at nightfall; and he was in Ithilien (the
  episode  of  the  stewed  rabbit)  and  was taken  by Faramir  to Henneth
  Annun  on  Feb.  6  (the  night  of  Full  Moon, which  Frodo saw  in the
  small hours of Feb. 7 setting over Mindolluin). In my father's  letter of
  16  October  1944  he  said that  among the  alterations made  to resolve
  'the  dislocated  chronology'  he  had  increased  the  journey  from the
  Morannon  by  a  day;  this  alteration  was  made to  scheme D,  and was
  present in scheme S as first written (see pp. 141-2). But  the alteration
  was  made  by pushing  Frodo's journey  back by  a day,  so that  he came
  before  the  Morannon  on  Feb.  4; he  still comes  to Henneth  Annun on
  the  6th.  Therefore,  when he  looked out  from the  Window of  the West
  and  saw  the  moon  setting, Gandalf  and Pippin  were already  in Minas
  Tirith;  the time-schemes  are explicit  (and it  was presumably  on this
  basis that in outline III, p. 259, Pippin in Minas Tirith on  the evening
  of  the  6th  'sees the  full moon  rising and  wonders where  Frodo is';
  similarly in outline V, p. 262, and also in the outline given in the next
  chapter, p. 276).                                                        
    In  the second  draft (B)  of the  opening of  'Minas Tirith'  (p. 232)
  Pippin on the night of Feb. 5( - 6) saw the full moon  rising out  of the
  eastern shadows as he rode with Gandalf; and  in the  third draft  (C, in
  'midget  type',  p.  233) Pippin  wonders where  Frodo might  be, 'little
  thinking that Frodo  on that  same night  saw from  afar the  white snows
  under  the  moon.'  Surely  my  father's  intention  here  was  to relate
  Pippin's  thought  to  Frodo's  at Henneth  Annun (as  in RK);  but there
  was a day out. Was this the chronological problem?                       
    On the face of it, apparently not;  for the  modifications made  to the
  chronology did not  correct it.  On the  other hand,  that my  father was
  concerned with precisely this question is seen from  an isolated  page of
  notes on diverse subjects, one of which casts some  very cloudy  light on
  the matter:                                                              
                                                                          
    Whole  of  Frodo's  and  Sam's  adventures  must  be  set  back  one day,
    so  that Frodo  sees moon-set  on morning  (early hours)  of Feb.  6, and
    Faramir  reaches  Minas   Tirith  on   night  of   the  7th,   and  Great
    Darkness  begins  on  7th.  (This  can  be  done  by  making   Frodo  and
    Sam  only  wander  4  days  in  the  Emyn  Muil.)  The  next  night Frodo
    would  see  from  far  away  the   full  moon   set  beyond   Gondor  and
    wonder  where  he  was  in  the mists  of the  West, and  the war-beacons
    would be hid from him in the darkness of the world.                    
                                                                          
  This is very difficult to understand.  Frodo's adventures  are to  be set
  back by a day, and he will see the setting of the moon (not yet  quite at
  the full) from  Henneth Annun  in the  later night  of Feb.  5 -  6, when

                                                                           
                                                                           
 Pippin  was  on  the  last lap  to Minas  Tirith, and  thought of  him. But
 then why is it not  till the  next night  (Feb. 6-7)  that Frodo  thinks of
 Pippin (if 'him' is Pippin), and why is it on this  night that  the beacons
 of Gondor are burning?                                                     
                                                                           
                      (ii) Theoden comes to Harrowdale.                     
                                                                           
 In  the  second  version  (B)  of 'The  Muster of  Rohan' (p.  237) Aragorn
 agrees  with  Theoden,  as  they  enter  Harrowdale,  that  the   moon  was
 full  the  night  before, and  he says  that they  have been  four (changed
 from  five)  days  on  the  road,  so  that  six  remained  before  the day
 appointed  for  the   muster  at   Edoras.  In   time-scheme  C   (p.  140)
 Theoden  reaches  Helm's  Deep  from  Isengard  soon  after  dawn  on  Feb.
 4,  and  he  leaves  Helm's Deep  on Feb.  5 (when  also 'Aragorn  rides on
 ahead  with  Gimli and  Legolas': this  appears in  the third  narrative C,
 p.   241).   Nothing  further   is  said   about  Theoden's   movements  in
 time-scheme  C; but  if the  two texts  are combined  we get  the following
 chronology:                                                                
   Feb. 4 Theoden reaches Helm's Deep soon after dawn                       
   Feb. 5 Theoden leaves Helm's Deep                                        
   Feb. 6 Full Moon                                                         
   Feb. 7 Theoden reaches Harrowdale at dusk                                
   Feb. 13 Date appointed for the muster                                    
 If this is correct, the 'four days on the  road' include  the day  spent at
 Helm's Deep.                                                               
   In the third version C  (p. 240)  Eomer says  that the  moon was  full on
 the night before the last, that five days have passed  on the  journey, and
 that five remain until the muster;  and all  this is  repeated in  the next
 version (F) in which  the passage  appears (pp.  244-5). In  these versions
 the journey has taken one day more, as it appears:                         
   Feb. 5. Theoden leaves Helm's Deep.                                        
   Feb. 6. Full Moon.                                                         
   Feb. 7.                                                                   
   Feb. 8. Theoden reaches Harrowdale.                                       
   Time-scheme  D  (pp.  141,  182)  gives  the  following  chronology (with
 which the fully 'synoptic' scheme S agrees):                               
   Feb. 4-5. Aragorn  rides by  night to  Edoras, which  he reaches  in the
 morning, and passes up Harrowdale.                                          
   Feb. 5. Theoden leaves Helm's Deep                                        
   Feb. 6. Full   Moon   rises   about   9.20   p.m.  Theoden   comes  to
 Dunharrow before nightfall                                                 
   (Feb. 7.  Theoden  prepares   to  ride   to  Gondor.   Messengers  from
 Minas Tirith arrive.                                                       
   Feb. 8. Theoden rides from Edoras.)                                       
 This  is  the  chronology  of  the typescript  text H  (pp. 251-2),  to the
 extent at least that the moon is full (rising four hours after dark) on the

 night  of  Theoden's  arrival  in Harrowdale:  the journey  through the
 mountains  now took  only two  days. It  is not  the chronology  of The
 Tale of  Years in  LR, in  which Theoden  set out  from Helm's  Deep on
 March 6 but did not reach Dunharrow until March 9.                    
   The date appointed for  the muster  at Edoras  as deduced  above from
 the original narrative openings of the  chapter, Feb.  13 (a  week after
 the full  moon  of Feb.  6), is  presumably to  be associated  with the
 change  in  the  second  manuscript  of  'The  Road  to  Isengard' from
 'before the waning of the moon' to 'at  the last  quarter of  the moon'
 (see pp. 27, 40). In the text H (p. 252)  Eomer says  to the  King that
 'Tomorrow ere  evening you  shall come  to Edoras  and keep  tryst with
 your Riders'; with this perhaps cf. outline I (p. 255):  'Messages must
 bid  Rohirrim  assemble  at Edoras  as soon  as may  be after  the Full
 Moon of Feb. 6.'                                                      

                                    III.                                  
                                MINAS TIRITH.                             
                                                                         
 'I hope after this week actually to - write,' my  father wrote  to Stanley
 Unwin on 21 July 1946 (Letters no. 105);  and it  is clear  that he  did -
 at any rate on 7 December of that year he said  that he  was 'on  the last
 chapters'  (whatever  that  may  have  meant).  Another  synopsis  of  the
 proposed  content  of  'Book  W  shows  much  further  development  in the
 narrative of the opening chapters, and I incline to think that  it belongs
 to  1946  and  was set  down as  a guide  to the  new work  now beginning;
 I therefore give it here rather than with the outlines  that I  believe to
 date  from  1944  (pp.  252  ff.).  My father  had now  re-ordered earlier
 chapters, and so numbered the first of Book V in  this synopsis  '44' (not
 '41':  see  p. 226  note 49).'  The text  was written  in pencil  and then
 overwritten in ink: the  underlying text  was far  briefer, but  is barely
 legible except at the end, where the overwriting ceases.                 
                                                                         
                                   Book V.                                
   Ch.  44  (1).   Gandalf  (and   Pippin)  rides   to  Minas   Tirith  and
 see[s]  Denethor.  Pippin  on  walls.  Coming  in  of  last  allies. Great
 Darkness begins that night.                                              
   45.   King   and   Aragorn   (with  Merry,   Legolas,  Gimli)   ride  to
 the   Hornburg.   Overtaken   by    the   Sons    of   Elrond (2) and   30
 Rangers   seeking   Aragorn   (probably  because   of  messages   sent  by
 Galadriel   to   Elrond).   King   rides   to   Dunharrow    by   mountain
 roads.   Aragorn   (Legolas   and   Gimli)   and   Rangers   go   by  open
 road.  Aragorn  reveals  he  has  looked  in   Palantir,  and   seeks  the
 Paths   of   the   Dead.   King   arrives   at   Dunharrow  dusk   2  days
 later (3) and finds  Aragorn  has  gone  on  Paths  of  the   Dead.  Errand
 riders   of   Gondor   come.    Muster   of    Rohan   takes    place   in
 Harrowdale   (by   Gandalf's   orders)   not   Edoras,   and   King   sets
 out next morning for Edoras.                                             
   46.   Pippin   on   walls.   Several   days    later   when    Host   of
 Morghul   is   victorious.   News  comes   through  of   flanking  attacks
 on  Lorien  and  by  Harad  in  South.  A  great  army  has  crossed  into
 Wold   of  Rohan.   They  fear   Rohirrim  will   not  come.   Dark  grows
 but  even  so  the  Nazgul  cause  a  greater  darkness.   Gandalf  shines
 in  the  field.  Pippin  sees the  light of  him as  he and  Faramir rally
 men.  But  at  last  the  enemy  are  at  the  gates,  and the  Nazgul fly

 over the  city. Then  just as  gate is  giving way  they hear  the horns
 of Rohan!                                                               
   47.   Go   back   to   Merry.   Charge  of   Rohan.  Orcs   and  Black
 Riders  driven  from  gate.  Fall   of  Theoden   wounded,  but   he  is
 saved  by  a  warrior  of  his   household  who   falls  on   his  body.
 Merry  sits  by  them.  Sortie  saves  King  who  is   gravely  wounded.
 Warrior  found  to   be  Eowyn.   The  Hosts   of  Morghul   reform  and
 drive  them  back  to  the  gate.  At  that  moment  a wind  rises, dark
 is  rolled  back.  Black  ships  seen.  Despair.  Standard   of  Aragorn
 (and   Elendil).  Eomer's   wrath.  Morghul   taken  between   2  forces
 and defeated. Eomer and Aragorn meet.                                   
   48.  Gandalf  and  Denethor  learn   of  the   defeat  of   the  flank
 attacks   by   Shadow   Host (4) and   by   Ents.   They   cross   Anduin
 victorious   and   invest   Minas    Morghul.   Gandalf    and   Aragorn
 come to Morannon and parley.                                            
   49. Return to Frodo and Sam.                                          
                                                                        
      At this point the overwriting in ink ceases - perhaps because my
 father saw that at this rate he was going to be very hard  put to  it to
 complete the story in 'Book Five and  Last' (p.  219). In  the pencilled
 underlying text he had had this programme for the last seven chapters:
   48. Gandalf comes to the Black Gate.                                  
   49. Frodo and Sam come to Orodruin.                                   
   50........... and return.                                             
   51. Feast at Minas Tirith.                                            
   52. Funeral at Edoras.                                                
   53. Return to Rivendell. Meeting with Bilbo.                          
   54. Sam's Book and the passing of all Tales.                          
                                                                        
   It  was perhaps  immediately before  he turned  to the  chapter 'Minas
 Tirith'  again  that  my  father  set  down a  further and  very precise
 outline, which follows here (the figures refer of course to the dates in
 the month of February).                                                 
                                                                        
   Gandalf  and  Pippin  ride  to  Minas  Tirith  (3/4, 415,  arriving at
 sunrise  on  6).  Pass  Fords  of  Isen  and  reach  mouth   of  Deeping
 Coomb  about  2  a.m.  (4).   Come  at   daybreak  to   Edoras.  Gandalf
 remains  there  during   daylight.  2[nd]   Nazgul  passes   over  Rohan
 (it  left  Mordor  about  midnight  314  but spies  out plain  and flies
 low  over  Edoras  in   early  morn[ing]).(5) Gandalf  rides   again  on
 night  of  4/5  and  passes  into Anorien,  where he  lies hid  in hills
 during  daylight  (5).  Riding  for  third  night  (5/6)  they  see  the
 beacons  flare  out,  and  are  passed  by  messengers  on  swift horses
 speeding  from  Minas  Tirith  to  Edoras.   They  reach   the  Pelennor
 Wall  at  first  dawn,  and  after  speech  with  guards   pass  through

                                                                 
                                                                        
 and  sight  Minas  Tirith  in  the  sunrise  (6).  They pass  up through
 the  7  concentric  walls  and  gates  to the  White Tower.  Pippin sees
 white  houses  and   domes  on   the  slopes   of  the   mountain  above
 the city. Gandalf explains they  are the  'houses of  the kings'  - i.e.
 dead  tombs.  (Before  the  gate  of  the  White  Tower  they   see  the
 ruin   of  the   Tree,  and   Fountain?)  They   are  admitted   to  the
 audience  chamber,  and  see   the  throne.   Denethor  comes   in,  and
 does  not  sit  in  the  throne,  but  on  a  smaller  chair  lower down
 and  in  front.  Interview  with  Denethor  and  his  grief  at  news of
 Boromir.  They  learn  reason  of  beacons:  a  great  fleet   has  been
 sighted   coming   from   Umbar   to   mouths   of  Anduin.   Also  mes-
 sages  from  spies  etc.  in  Ithilien  report that  'storm is  about to
 burst'.  Denethor  is   vexed  that   no  aid   has  come   from  Rohan.
 Gandalf  explains  the   situation.  Also   warns  Denethor   that  help
 may   even  now   be  delayed   as  almost   certainly  Rohan   will  be
 attacked   on   eastern   flank   north  of   Emyn  Muil.   He  counsels
 Denethor   to   muster   what   he   can  at   once.  'The   muster  has
 already  begun,'  said  Denethor.  (Forlong  the Fat  etc., but  too few
 come from Lebennin owing to threat of sea-attack.)                      
   Pippin  on  the  battlements  has talk  with a  sentinel. He  sees the
 moonrise on night of 6 (about 8.45 p.m.) and thinks of Frodo.(6)        
   Aragorn   takes   Legolas   and   Gimli   and   Merry   and   proposes
 that  what  is  left  of  the  Company  shall be  reunited. He  says his
 heart  now  urges  him  to  speed,  for  the time  of his  own revealing
 approaches.  They   may  have   a  hard   and  dangerous   journey,  for
 now  the  real business  is beginning,  beside which  the battle  of the
 Hornburg  is  but  a  skirmish  by  the  way.  They  agree  and  Aragorn
 and   his  company   leave  Dolbaran   ahead  of   the  king   at  about
 midnight.   Merry   rides   with  Aragorn,   and  Gimli   with  Legolas.
 They  go  fast  and  reach  Westfold  at  daybreak  (4) and  [struck out
 at  once:  do  not  turn  aside  but  go  straight]  see the  2nd Nazgul
 flying.                                                                 
                                                                        
   A great deal of the first part of this  derives directly  from earlier
 outlines, but by no means all (thus it is here that  the great  tombs of
 Minas Tirith are first mentioned, and it is here that Pippin's friend of
 the Citadel  guard -  Beregond in  RK -  first appears).  The concluding
 portion  of  the  outline,  however,  telling  that Aragorn  with Merry,
 Legolas  and  Gimli  left  together  from  Dol Baran  ahead of  the king
 about  midnight,  reaching  Westfold at  dawn of  the following  day and
 not  so  very  many  hours  after  Gandalf,  is  an  odd  and surprising
 development.(7) But  it  seems to  have been  abandoned at  once, without
 further issue.                                                          

  Taking  up  the  opening   chapter  'Minas   Tirith'  again,   my  father
  followed  closely the  abandoned opening  (the text  C in  'midget type')
  so far as it went, and the new text still differs from RK pp.  19 -  21 in
  the points  mentioned on  p. 233,  except that  the leader  of the  men at
  the Pelennor Wall is now  Ingold, not Cranthir.(8) Written  for most  of its
  length rapidly but generally legibly in ink, the draft extends  almost to
  the end of the chapter;  and from  the point  in the  story where  C ended
  (in  the  conversation with  the men  repairing the  wall), for  which my
  father  had  only  very  sketchy  notes,  he advanced  confidently through
  account  of  Minas  Tirith  seen  across  the 'townlands',  the structure
  of  the  city,  the  entry  of  Gandalf and  Pippin, the  'audience' with
  Denethor, and  Pippin's meeting  with Beregond  (not yet  nor for  a long
  time  so  named).  This  draft  underwent  countless  changes  afterwards,
  yet from its first writing  the story  was present  in all  essentials of
  narrative structure, of atmosphere, and of tone. In  what follows  it can
  be assumed that every  significant feature  of description  and conversa-
  tion in the chapter was present in the draft unless something is  said to
  the contrary. On the other hand  I do  not record  all the  small touches
  that were added in later:  for example,  Denethor does  not in  the draft
  text lay down his rod in order to lift the horn from  his lap;  Pippin is
  not said to receive back his sword and put it in  its sheath;  chairs are
  brought for Gandalf and  Pippin, not  a chair  and a  stool; the  room in
  which they were lodged had only one window, not three; and so on.        
    As noted earlier, the text C stops just before Gandalf  tells Cranthir/
  Ingold that  'you are  overlate in  repairing the  wall of  the Pelennor'
  {p. 233; RK p. 21), so that this name does not appear.  In the  new draft
  Gandalf,  in his  words with  Ingold, speaks  of the  wall of  Pelennor' -
  but  it  appears immediately  afterwards that  this was  the name  of the
  wall itself:                                                             
                                                                          
  Gandalf passed now into the wide space beyond  the Pelennor.             
  So the men of Gondor called the wall that was built long ago             
  after Ithilien fell into the hands of the Enemy.                         
                                                                          
  The name appears also in several of the outlines  that I  have attributed
  to 1944 and given in  the last  chapter: 'Pelennor  wall' (p.  260), 'the
  wall of Pelennor' (p. 263), 'the Outer Wall of Pelennor' (p. 263), but in
  the light of the present draft these  are ambiguous;  on the  other hand,
  in  outline  IV  (p.  260)  occurs 'the  Cityland, Pelennor,  about which
  ruins of an old wall ran', which is not at all ambiguous. On the  face of
  it, my father  twice changed  his mind  about the  meaning of  this name;
  for in RK (p. 22)  the wall  is named  Rammas Echor  and the  Pelennor is
  again the name of the 'fair and fertile townlands'  of Minas  Tirith (see
  pp. 287 - 8).                                                            
    The description in the draft continues:                                
                                                                          
  It went in a wide circle from the mountains' feet and back to            

                                                           
                                                                        
 them,  always  distant  some  seven  leagues  from  the  First  Gate  of
 the  City  that  looked  eastward..  Thus  it  enclosed  the   fair  and
 fertile  townlands  on  the  long  green  slopes  falling to  the River,
 and  at  its  easternmost   point  overlooked   from  a   frowning  bank
 the  marshy  levels.  There  it was  loftiest and  most guarded,  for on
 a  walled  causeway  the  road  from  the fords  of Osgiliath,  a league
 away,  came  in   through  a   great  gate   between  two   towers.  But
 few  men  save  herdsmen  and  tillers  dwelt  in  the   townlands,  for
 the  most  part  of  the  people of  Gondor dwelt  in the  seven circles
 of  the  city  of  Minas   Tirith,  or   in  the   deep  vales   of  the
 mountains'   borders;   and   away  southward   in  Lebennin   the  land
 of  Seven  Rivers  lived  a  hardy  folk   between  the   mountains  and
 the  mouths  of  Anduin  and  the  Sea;  and  they  were   reckoned  men
 of  Gondor,  yet  their  blood  was  mixed  and  if  their  stature  and
 faces  told  the  truth  came  more  from  those  men  who dwelt  in the
 dark hills in the Dark Years ere the coming of the kings.               
   But now the light of day grew, and Pippin looked up ...               
                                                                        
 Thus the townlands were at first conceived altogether differently,  as a
 great half-circle centred on the city and always with a radius  of seven
 leagues, whereas in RK the enclosing wall was at its furthest point four
 leagues from the city and at its nearest little more than one.(9) In this
 draft  text  there  is  no  mention  of  Emyn Arnen,  of the  Harlond, of
 Lossarnach, of Belfalas, or of Imrahil  of Dol  Amroth, and  Lebennin is
 still 'the land of Seven Rivers' (see  VII.310-12, and  pp. 252,  254 in
 this book).                                                             
   Pippin's first sight of Minas Tirith and Gandalf 's encounter with the
 guards at the Great Gate is very much as in RK (p.  23), except  that in
 the following passage from RK the bracketed part is absent:             
                                                                        
   but  to  his  right great  mountains reared  their heads,  [ranging from
   the West to a steep and  sudden end,  as if  in the  making of  the land
   the  River  had  burst  through a  great barrier,  carving out  a mighty
   valley to be a land of battle  and debate  in times  to come.  And there
   where  the  White  Mountains  of  Ered  Nimrais   came  to   their  end]
   (and)  he  saw,  as  Gandalf  had  promised,  the  dark  mass  of  Mount
   Mindolluin ...                                                        
                                                                        
 Also, the Tower of Ecthelion is here called the Tower of Denethor (see
 p. 281).                                                                
   In the draft text the description of Minas Tirith is as follows:      
                                                                        
 For  the  manner  of  Minas  Tirith  was  such   that  it   was  builded
 upon  seven  levels  each  carved  in  the  hill, and  each had  a wall,
 and  in  each  wall  was  a  gate.  But  the  gates were  not made  in a
 line,  for  the outer  and lowest  gate was  in the  east, but  the next

                   
                                                                          
 faced  half  south  and  the  third  half north,  and so  on, so  that the
 pave[d]  way  that  led  up  without  break  or  stair  turned  first this
 way  and  [then]  that  way  across  the  face  of  the  hill,  until  the
 seventh  gate  was  reached  that  led  to  the  great  court  and citadel
 on  the  levelled   summit  about   the  feet   of  the   crowning  tower.
 And  that  gate  also  looked   due  east,   being  there   seven  hundred
 feet  above  the  plain   before  the   walls,  and   the  tower   on  the
 summit  was  three  hundred  feet   from  base   to  pinnacle.   A  strong
 citadel  indeed  it  was  and  not  to  be  taken  by  a  host  of  men if
 there   were   any   within   that   could   hold  weapons,   unless  some
 enemy   could   come   behind   and   scale   Mindolluin   and   so   come
 behind  upon  the  shoulder  that  joined  the  Hill   of  Guard   to  the
 mountain  mass.  But  that  shoulder  which  was  at  the  height  of  the
 fifth  wall  was  walled  right up  [to] the  precipice that  overhung it,
 and   there   stood   the   great   domed  tombs   of  bygone   kings  and
 lords, at once memorials and fortresses if need should come.              
                                                                          
  In  the  original  hasty  sketch  of  Minas Tirith  reproduced on  p. 261
 the gates appear  to be  arranged in  two lines  meeting at  the uppermost
 level, the one proceeding from the Great Gate (1  - 3  - 5  - 7),  and the
 other proceeding from the second gate (2 - 4 - 6 - 7).(10) In the  text just
 cited the configuration described in RK  is present,  with the  Great Gate
 facing east, the second gate south-east, the third  north-east, and  so on
 up to the entrance to the Citadel, again facing east. On this page  of the
 draft  (reproduced  on  p.  280)  my  father  drew  a  plan in  which this
 arrangement  is  shown.  The  upper  figure  on  the page  is in  fact two
 conjoined: the  smaller area  at the  upper left  (marked with  'M.T.' and
 'summit  of  Mindolluin') was  that first  made, and  this was  struck out
 with three transverse lines. - It will be seen that the 'vast pier of rock
 whose huge out-thrust  bulk divided  in two  all the  circles of  the City
 save the first' (RK p. 24), causing the  mounting road  to pass  through a
 tunnel each time it crossed the line from the Great  Gate to  the Citadel,
 was not yet present.                                                      
  Pippin's  sense  of  the  diminishment  and decay  of Minas  Tirith, with
 its great silent houses, is told in the draft in words closely  similar to
 those  of  the  passage  in  RK (p.  24);(11) but  the accoutrement  of the
 guards of the Seventh Gate is thus described:                             
                                                                          
 The  guards  of  the  gate  were  robed  in  white,  and   the[ir]  helms
 were  of  strange  shape,  shining  like  silver,  for  they  were indeed
 of  mithril,  heirlooms   from  the   glory  of   old  days,   and  above
 either   cheekpiece   were  set   the  wings   of  sea-birds.   Upon  the
 breast   of   their   surcoats   were   embroidered   in  white   a  tree
 blossoming like snow and above it a silver crown.                         

 (Minas Tirith and Mindolluin.)

  It is  added here  that beside  the guards  of the  Citadel one  other wore
  this livery of the heirs of Elendil: 'the warden of the door of the hall of
  the  kings  aforetime  where  now  dwelt  the  Lord  Denethor';  and  at the
  door  there  is  one  'tall  guard' ('the  tall silent  door-wardens', RK).
  Perhaps the change in  the colour  of the  livery from  white to  black was
  on account of the white tree embroidered on the coats.                     
    The  dead  Tree in  the court  of the  Fountain, with  Pippin's recollec-
  tion  of  Gandalf's  words  Seven  stars  and seven  stones and  one white
  gree,  and  Gandalf's  warning  to  him to  bear himself  discreetly before
  Denethor,  survived  into  the  final  text  with  very little  change; but
  Gandalf  says  only  of  Denethor  and  Boromir:  He  loved   him  greatly,
  coo  much,  perhaps',  and  does  not  add  'and the  more so  because they
  were unlike' (yet later, when  they have  left Denethor,  he says,  much as
  in  RK:  'He  is  not  quite  as  other  men, Pippin,  and whatever  be his
  ancestry  by  some  chance  the  blood  of  the  men  of  Westernesse  runs
  true in him, as it does in his other son  Faramir, and  yet not  in Boromir
  whom  he  loved  most.  They  have long  sight.'). And  of Aragorn  he says
  that  'if  he  comes  it  may  be  in  some  way that  no one  expects. And
  Denethor  at  least  does  not  expect  him  in  any way,  for he  does not
  know that he exists.'                                                      
    The  great  hall  was  conceived  from  the first  almost exactly  as the
  description  of  it  stands in  RK (p.  26): the  great images  between the
  pillars,  reminding  Pippin  of  'the  kings   of  Argonath',(12) the  empty
  throne,  the  old  man  in  the  stone chair  gazing at  his lap.  Only the
  carved capitals of the pillars  are not  mentioned; on  the other  hand the
  floor  of  the  hall  is  described: 'But  the floor  was of  shining stone,
  white-gleaming,  figured  with  mosaics  of  many  colours'  (see  p. 288).
  The  name  of  Denethor's  father,  Ecthelion,  entered  here,   with  only
  momentary  hesitation  (earlier  in  the  draft the  White Tower  is called
  the  Tower   of  Denethor,   not  as   in  RK   the  Tower   of  Ecthelion;
  p. 278).(13)                                                               
    When  Pippin  cried 'that  is the  horn that  Boromir always  wore!' this
  dialogue follows in the draft:                                             
                                                                            
    'Verily,' said Denethor. 'And in my turn I wore it, and so did           
  each eldest son of our house far  back into  the mists  of time,           
  before the failing of the kings, since [Mardil >] Faragon father           
  of Mardil hunted the wild oxen of  Araw (14) in  the far  fields of           
  Rhun. But we heard  it blowing  dimly in  the North  twelve days           
  ago, and now it will blow no more.'                                        
    'Yes,' said Pippin. 'I stood beside him as he blew it,  and it           
  shook the woods; but no help came. Only more orcs.'                        
                                                                            
           Pippin's account of Boromir's death, his offer of his service to
  Denethor,  and  the  swearing  of the  oath were  very largely  achieved in

                                               
                                                                             
 the  draft  text,(16) save in  one notable  point: it  is Gandalf,  not Denethor,
 who  speaks  the  words  of  the  oath:  '"Take  the  hilts,"   said  Gandalf,
 "and  speak  after  me."  The  old  man  laid  the  sword  along  his  lap and
 Pippin laid  his hand  on the  hilts and  said slowly  after Gandalf  ...' The
 oath   and   its   acceptance   were  scarcely   changed  from   the  original
 formulation  in  the  draft,  except  only  in  the  point  that  Denethor did
 not there name himself 'Steward of the High King'.                           
  The   words  between   Denethor  and   Gandalf  that   follow  (RK   p.  29),
 and  Pippin's  perception  of  the  tension  between  them,  and  of Gandalf's
 greater  power  (though  veiled),  reached  immediately  the  final   text  in
 almost  every  point;  but  Pippin's  reflection  on  Gandalf's age  and being
 took  this  form:  'Whence  and  what  was  Gandalf:  when  and  in  what  far
 time  and  place  [was  he  born  >]  did  he  come into  the world  and would
 he  ever  die?'  His  passing  thought  'Treebeard  had  said  something about
 wizards,  but  even  then  he  had  not  thought  of Gandalf  as one  of them'
 does not  appear; it  is not  said that  'it was  Denethor who  first withdrew
 his  gaze';  and  Denethor  says  only  'for  though  the  Stones  are  lost',
 without adding 'they say'.                                                   
  In  the  margin  of  the  page  that  bears  this  passage  my  father wrote:
 'For  his  wisdom  did  not   consider  Gandalf,   whereas  the   counsels  of
 Denethor  concerned  himself,  or  Gondor  which  in  his  thought   was  part
 of  himself'.  There  is  no indication  where this  was to  be placed,  but I
 think  that  it  would  follow  'Pippin  perceived  that  Gandalf  had greater
 power, and deeper wisdom - and a majesty that was veiled.'                   
  The  interview  with  Denethor  ended   far  more   abruptly  in   the  draft
 than  in  RK  (pp.  30-1):  at  Denethor's words  'Let your  wrath for  an old
 man's  seeming  folly  run  off,  and  return  to  my  comfort'  there follows
 only:  '"I  will  return  as  soon  as  may  be," said  Gandalf. "But  I crave
 sometime  words  with  you  alone."  And   he  strode   from  the   hall  with
 Pippin running at his side.'                                                 
  After  Gandalf  had  left  the  house  in  which  they  were   lodged  Pippin
 encountered  a  man  clad  in  grey   and  white   who  named   himself  Beren
 son  of  Turgon  (Beregond  son  of  Baranor,  clad  in  black  and  white, in
 RK).  In  their  opening  conversation  and  visits   to  Shadowfax   and  the
 buttery  a  number  of  small  alterations  and  additions  were  made  to the
 narrative  later,  but  all  are  slight  points: for  example, Beren  says to
 Pippin that 'It is said that you are to be treated as a guest for this  day at
 the  least',  and  that  'Those  who  have  had  heavy  duty  -  and  guests -
 take  somewhat  to  refresh  their  strength   in  the   mid-morning';  Pippin
 does  not  express  his  disappointment  at  seeing no  inns in  Minas Tirith;
 and  the   following  curious   dialogue  was   afterwards  removed   (cf.  RK
 p. 34):                                                                      
                                                                             
 '... For now I may say that strange accents do not mar fair                  
 speech, and hobbits are well-spoken folk.'                                   
  'So Denethor, I mean the high Lord, said.'                                  

    'Did he indeed?' said Beren. 'Then you have received a mark           
 of favour such as few guests have got from him.'                         
                                                                         
 The keeper of the buttery  was named  Duilas (?),  with a  later pencilled
 alteration  to  Garathon.(17) Pippin tells  Beren: I  am only  a boy  in the
 reckoning of our people, for I am only twenty  years old  and we  are not
 held to be grown-up as we say in the Shire for a dozen years more.'(18)  
    As  Beren and  Pippin looked  out from  the walls,  'Away down  in the
 vale-bottom  7  leagues  or  so  as the  eye leaps,  the Great  River now
 flowed  grey and  glittering, coming  out of  the north-west  and curving
 south-west  till it  was lost  to view  round the  shoulders of  the moun-
 tains in a haze and shimmer' (see  pp. 288  - 9),  whereas it  is distant
 'five  leagues  or so'  in RK  (p. 36):  on this  difference see  p. 278.
 Immediately after this the original draft jumps, in relation to  RK, from
 'far beyond which lay the Sea  fifty leagues  away' to  ' "What do  I see
 there?"  asked Pippin,  pointing due  eastward down  to the  river'; thus
 the entire passage is lacking in which Pippin sees the traffic of waggons
 crossing the Pelennor  and turning  south, and  Beregond explains  to him
 that  they are  taking 'the  road to  the vales  of Tumladen  and Lossar-
 nach,  and  the  mountain-villages, and  then on  to Lebennin.'  But from
 this  point  the  conversation  of  Beren/Beregond  and  Pippin   to  its
 conclusion,  as  it  stands  in  RK  (pp.  36-40), was  achieved, roughly
 indeed, but with scarcely any significant detail lacking, and  often very
 dose to the final text: the  darkness in  the East,(19) the passage  of the
 Nazgul far overhead, Beren's account of the battles for the  crossings at
 Osgiliath,(20) of Denethor's far sight,(21) of the approach of the  great fleet
 manned  by  the  corsairs  of Umbar,(22) of Faramir,  and his  invitation to
 Pippin to join his company for that day.                                 
    At this point the story told in the draft becomes altogether different
 from  that of  RK, and  I give  the remainder  (very roughly  written) of
 this earliest text in full:                                              
                                                                         
    Gandalf was not in the lodging, and  Pippin went  with Beren          
 of  the Guard,  and he  was shown  to the  others of  the third          
 company  and  welcomed  by  them,  and  made  merry  with them,          
 taking his midday meal  among them  in a  little hall  near the          
 north  wall, and  going here  and there  with others  until the          
 evening  meal,  and  the  closing  hour,  and  the  lowering of          
 standards.  Then  he himself  after the  manner of  Gondor soon          
 went to his bed. Gandalf had not come or  left any  message. He          
 rolled into bed and soon slept. In the night he was awakened by          
 a light and saw Gandalf in the room outside the alcove.  He was          
 pacing to and  fro. 'When  will Faramir  return?* he  heard him          
 mutter, as he peered out of the dark  window. Then  Pippin went          
 to sleep again.                                                          

   The  next  day  still  no  commands  came  from Denethor.  'He is
 full  of cares  and busyness,'  said Gandalf,  'and for  the moment
 you are out of  his mind.  But not  for good!  He does  not forget.
 Make  use of  your leisure  while you  can. Have  a look  round the
 City.'(23)                                                        
   Beren  was  on  duty  and  Pippin  was  left  alone;  but  he had
 learned  enough  to  find  his  way to  the hatches  at midmorning.
 For the rest of the time until noon he walked in the  sixth circle,
 and  visited  Shadowfax,  taking  him  some  morsels  that  he  had
 saved,  which  Shadowfax  graciously  accepted.  In  the  afternoon
 Pippin  walked  down  the  ways of  the City  to the  lowest circle
 and the great East Gate.                                          
   People  stared  much  at  him  as  he passed,  and he  would hear
 calls behind him, and  those out  of doors  cried to  others within
 to  come  see  Mithrandir's  halfling;  but to  his face  most were
 courteous,  saluting  him  gravely  after  the  manner   of  Gondor
 with  outstretched  hand  and  a  bowing  of the  head. For  who he
 was  and  much  concerning  him  was   now  noised   through  Minas
 Tirith.                                                           
   He  came  at  last  by  windy  ways  and  many  fair  alleys  and
 arches  to  the  lower  circles  where  there  [were]  many smaller
 houses.  And here  and there  he saw  children -  and he  was glad,
 for to his eyes it had seemed that too  many of  the folk  of Minas
 Tirith were old. He  passed a  larger house  with a  pillared porch
 and  steps  and  boys were  playing there.  As soon  as he  saw him
 one of the boys leapt down the steps into the  street and  stood in
 front of Pippin, looking him up and down.                         
   'Well met,' said the lad. 'Are you not a stranger?'             
   'I was,' said Pippin. 'But they say I am now a man of Gondor.'
   'Man!  '  said  the  boy.  'How  old  are you,  and what  is your
 name? I am ten already and soon shall  be five  feet high.  Look, I
 am taller than you. But then  my father  is a  soldier, one  of the
 tallest.(24) I shall be a soldier too. What is your father?'         
   'Which question shall I  answer first?'  said Pippin.  'My father
 is like me a hobbit  not a  man, and  he owns  the land  and fields
 round  Whitwell  near  Tuckborough  on  the  edge  of  the Westfar-
 thing  in  the  Shire.  I  am  21 years  old (25) so I pass  you there,
 though  I  am  but  four  feet four,  and that  is reckoned  a good
 height in my  land, and  I do  not hope  to better  it much.  For I
 shall  not  grow  upward  much  before  I   come  of   age;  though
 maybe I shall thicken and put on  some weight,  or should,  if food
 were plentiful for travellers in the wild places.'                

   'Twenty-one,'   said   Gwinhir,   and   whistled.  'Why,   you  are
 quite old. Still, I  wager I  could stand  you on  your head,  or lay
 you on your back.'                                                  
   'Maybe  you could  if I  let you,'  said Pippin  with a  laugh. 'We
 know a  trick or  two of  wrestling in  my little  country. But  I do
 not  much  like  standing  on  my  head;  what,  if  it  came   to  a
 sicking  point,  and  nothing  else  would  serve,  I  have  a sword,
 master Gwinhir.'                                                    
   'A  sword,  have  you?'  said   Gwinhir.  'Then   you  must   be  a
 soldier. Though you don't look like one.'                           
   'I  am  and  I  do  not indeed,'  said Pippin.  'But when  you have
 seen  more  than 10  years, if  you live  long enough,  young friend,
 and survive the days that are coming,  you will  learn that  folk are
 not  always  what  they  seem.  Why,   you  might   take  me   for  a
 kind-hearted fool of a  stranger lad.  But I  am not.  I am  a hobbit
 and the  devil of  a hobbit,  companion of  wizards, friend  of Ents,
 member  of  the   Company  of   Nine  of   whom  your   lord  Boromir
 was one,  of the  ... of  the Nine  I should  say, and  I was  at the
 battle  of  the  Bridge  of  Moria and  the sack  of Isengard,  and I
 wish for no wrestling or rough play. So let me be lest I bite.'     
   'Ai,  Ai,'  said Gwinhir.  'You do  sound fierce,  a ferret  in the
 garb  of  a  rabbit.  But you  have left  your boots  behind, master,
 maybe  because  you  have  outgrown  them   too  quickly.   Come  on,
 good ferret, bite if you like,' and he ... up his fists. But  at that
 moment  a  man  came  out  from  the  door   and  sprang   down  into
 the street and grabbed the lad by the back of his tunic.            
   'What is this,  Gwinhir, you  ruffling young  fool,' said  the man.
 'Will  you  waylay  anything in  the street  that seems  smaller than
 yourself?  Will  you  not  choose  something   larger?  Shame   on  a
 son of mine, brawling before my doors like a young orc.'            
   'Nay,  nay,  not  like  an  orc,  Master Thalion,  if that  be your
 name,' said Pippin. 'I have  seen enough  orcs and  all too  close to
 be  in any  error. Here  is nothing  but a  warlike lad  spoiling for
 something to  do. Will  you not  let him  walk with  me a  while, and
 be  my  guide?  For I  am new  come and  there is  much to  see while
 the sun still shines........'                                       
   'I  have  already  heard  that  the  halflings  are   courteous  of
 speech,  if  that  one  that  came  hither   with  Mithrandir   is  a
 sample,'  said  Thalion.(26) Yes  indeed, the  young ruffian  shall go
 with  you  if  you  wish.  Go  now  and  keep a  fair tongue  in your
 head,'  he said  to Gwinhir,  giving him  a smart  blow on  his seat.
 'But see that he returns ere the closing hour and the dusk.'        

   'I  wanted  a  game,'  said  Gwinhir  to  Pippin   as  they   set  off.
 'There  are  few  lads  of  my  age in  this quarter,  and such  as there
 are  are  no  match  for  me.  But  my father  is stern,  and I  was near
 to  a  beating  just  now.  When  he  says  "orc"  'tis  an ill  omen for
 one's  back.  But  you  got  me  off  very  finely,  and  I   thank  you.
 What shall I show you? '                                                 
   'I  do  not  know,'  said Pippin,  'but I  am going  to the  East Gate,
 and we shall see.'                                                       
   As  they   drew  near   the  East   Gate  there   was  much   sound  of
 running   and   bustle,   and   Pippin   thought   he  heard   horns  and
 trumpets  blowing.  For  a  moment  his  heart  beat  for  he  thought it
 might  be  a  signal  that  war  had  begun.   But  Gwinhir   cried  out.
 'They  are  come.  Some  of  the   folk  from   beyond  the   walls  that
 have  been  rumoured.  Hasten  now,  they'll  be  riding  [?in  by]  the
 East Gate.                                                               
                                                                         
   Here  the  draft  ends, abandoned.  Why my  father rejected  this story
 one can only surmise; a clue is perhaps to be found at  the point  in the
 text where Pippin, at  the end  of his  first day  (6 February)  in Minas
 Tirith  (spent  in  the company  of Beren  and other  men of  the Guard),
 'after the  manner of  Gondor soon  went to  his bed'  (p. 283).  Here my
 father added a note  on the  manuscript in  pencil, reminding  himself to
 look up what  had been  said of  the weather  in the  story of  Frodo and
 Sam in Ithilien, and saying that 'if possible' the  sunset of  6 February
 should  be  'ominous':  'Darkness  began  next  morning,  a  fiery haze.'
 When he wrote this  he may  have intended  to rewrite  the story  only to
 the extent that Pippin should see the  'ominous' sunset  as he  went back
 to his lodging on the first  night, and  then when  he woke  next morning
 the  great pall  should have  overspread the  sky: in  deepening darkness
 he  would  make  his  way  down  to  the  Great  Gate, and  encounter the
 aggressive  Gwinhir. Or  it may  be that  it was  when writing  this note
 that  he  decided to  change the  structure of  the story,  and abandoned
 the draft. At any rate, he evidently decided that it  would be  better to
 compress the whole story  of this  chapter into  a single  day, concluded
 by  the first  presage of  the Darkness  approaching and  the smouldering
 sunset at the  closing of  the gates,  when the  last of  the men  of the
 Outlands  had   entered  the   City.  Chronological   considerations  may
 have played a part in this.                                              
   He now turned  back to  the point  where Beren  invited Pippin  to join
 his  company  for  that  day,  and  began  anew.  This  new  drafting was
 written  in  soft  pencil at  great speed,  and would  be hard  indeed to
 interpret and often altogether illegible were the new  text not  so close
 to the final form: the story becomes that of RK in virtually every point (27)
 and largely in the same words. But it peters out  shortly before  the end

 of the chapter, at the words 'But  the dying  sun set  it all  afire and
 Mindolluin was black against a dull smoulder' (RK p. 44).                 
   Beren now becomes Barathil, changed in  the course  of the  writing of
 the text to  Barithil; his  father's name  does not  appear. His  son was
 named  Bergil  from  the  first. The  Street of  the Lampwrights  has the
 Elvish  name  Rath a  Chalardain (Rath  Celerdain in  RK); and  Pippin is
 called Ernil a Pheriannath (i for a in RK).                              
   The  'Homeric  catalogue', as  my father  called it  (p. 229),  of the
 reinforcements  entering  Minas  Tirith (28) from  the Outlands  was written
 out twice, the first form being jumbled and unclear,  and at  the second
 writing (beginning after the arrival of  Forlong, at  the words  'And so
 the  companies  came  and were  hailed and  cheered ...',  RK p.  43) it
 becomes  remarkably  close  to  the  form  in  RK.  I  have  the  strong
 impression  that  the new  names that  appear here  were devised  in the
 composition  of  this  text.  Forlong  the  Fat,  however,  had appeared
 several times previously, pp. 229, 262, 276. He was  here first  said to
 be, as in  RK, 'lord  of the  vale of  Lossarnach',(29) but  Lossamach was
 struck out and replaced by 'the Ringlo away in Lebennin' (see  Map III
 in VII.309). Yet this is immediately contradicted in  both Eorms  of the
 text,  where  we  find  just as  in RK  'the men  of Ringlo  Vale behind
 Dervorin, son of their lord, striding on foot:  three hundreds.'  In the
 first form the vale is called Imlad-Ringlo. Duinhir and his  five hundred
 bowmen  from  the  Blackroot   Vale  (Morthond   Vale  and   Imlad  Mor-
 thond in the first form) is named (but not his sons, Duilin  and Derufin
 in  RK).  After  them  come  the  men  of  'Dor-Anfalas   [changed  from
 Belfalas],  the  Langstrand  far away':  see again  Map III  in VII.309,
 where 'Belfalas (Langstrand)'  is the  region afterwards  named Anfalas.
 Their  lord  is  Asgil-Golamir  (Golasgil  in RK).  Then the  hillmen of
 Lamedon, a name that first appears here; the  fisher-folk of  the Ethir;
 and Hirluin the Fair from the green hills of  Pinnath Gelin,  also first
 occurring here (but he is at first said to be from Erech). The Prince of
 Dol Amroth, kinsman of the Lord of Minas  Tirith, bears  the token  of a
 golden ship and a silver swan; but he is given no name.                 
                                                                        
  There  is  no  other  initial  drafting  extant  (except for  a roughly
 pencilled slip giving the  revised conclusion  of the  conversation with
 Denethor, RK pp. 30-1). The first complete text is a typescript: I think
 it all but certain that my father made this before he proceeded much, if
 any, further in the narrative.                                          
  The  title  of  the  chapter  as  typed  was:  Book  V   Chapter  XLIV:
 Peregrin enters the service of the Lord  of Minas  Tirith. For  the most
 part the differences  between the  original draft  and RK  noticed above
 (pp.  277-83  and  notes) were  retained in  this text:  some but  by no
 means  all  of  these  were changed  in pencil  on the  typescript. Thus
 Gandalf's ride still took three nights, not four. The description of the
 'townlands' of Minas Tirith remains as it was (pp. 277-8), with the sole

  difference  that  the  Pelennor now  becomes the  name of  the townlands,
  and  the  wall  is  named  Ramas  Coren  (changed  in  pencil  to  Rammas
  Ephel).(30) On  the  other  hand,  the  passage cited  on p.  278 concerning
  the River is now present as  in RK,  except for  the sentence  'And there
  where  the  White  Mountains  of  Eredfain  came  to their  end' (changed
  on  the  typescript  to  Ered  Nimrais).  The  White  Tower  remains  the
  Tower of  Denethor; and  the description  of Minas  Tirith remains  as it
  was in the draft, with no material difference save in  the height  of the
  Tower, here said  to be  two hundred,  not three  hundred feet.  Thus the
  great out-thrust pier of rock was still absent, and it was not introduced
  into this text. On the reverse of the preceding typescript page is a plan
  of the city,  reproduced on  p. 290;  here appears  the name  Rath Dinen,
  and  also  Othram  or City  Wall, of  the wall  of the  outermost circle,
  pierced by the Great Gate.(31)                                           
    In  the  account  of  the  great hall  the description  of the floor is
  retained from the draft, and that of the capitals introduced, thus:      
                                                                          
  Monoliths  of  black  marble,  they  rose  to  great  capitals  carved in
  many  figures  of   strange  beasts   and  leaves;   and  far   above  in
  shadow  the  wide  vaulting  gleamed  with  dull  gold.  The   floor  was
  of  polished   stone,  white-gleaming,   inset  with   flowing  traceries
  of many colours.                                                         
                                                                          
  This  was  repeated  in  the  following  typescript;  but  in  the  final
  typescript,  from  which the  text in  RK was  printed, the  sentence was
  compressed: '...  gleamed with  dull gold,  inset with  flowing traceries
  of many colours.' Since there is no indication  on the  second typescript
  that any change was intended,  it seems  certain that  this was  a casual
  'line-jumping' error, causing the 'flowing traceries'  to be  ascribed to
  the vaulting.                                                            
    Denethor  now  names  the  father  of  Mardil  Orondil (Faragon  in the
  draft, Vorondil in RK).  It is  still Gandalf,  not Denethor,  who speaks
  the words of the oath  which Pippin  repeats; but  the conclusion  of the
  conversation  between  Gandalf  and  Denethor  (also  found  in prelimi-
  nary drafting, p. 287) is now present, and  differs from  the form  in RK
  only  in  that  after  Gandalf's  words  'Unless  the  king  should  come
  again?' he continues: 'That would be a strange  conclusion. Well,  let us
  strive to keep some kingdom still against that event!'                  
    Barathil,  Barithil  of  the  second  draft (p.  287) is  now Barithil,
  becoming in the course of the typing of this text Berithil; he is the son
  of Baranor, as is Beregond in RK.  The man  at the  buttery hatch  is now
  Targon, as in RK.                                                        
    In  the  description  of  the  view  eastward from  the walls  of Minas
  Tirith the Anduin is still some seven leagues away, and as it bends 'in a
  mighty sweep south and west again' it is  still 'lost  to view  round the
  shoulders  of  the  mountains  in  a  haze  and  shimmer'  (p.  283). The

  italicized words  were afterwards  struck from  the typescript;  the reason
  for this can be seen from a  comparison of  Map III  in VII.309  with the
  large  map  of  Rohan,  Gondor  and  Mordor  in  The  Return of  the King,
  where the view of  the Great  River from  Minas Tirith  is not  impeded by
  the eastern  end  of the  mountains. The  passage in  RK which  was absent
  from  the  draft,  describing  the  traffic  across  the Pelennor,  is now
  present  and  reaches  the  final  form  in  every  point, save  only that
  Berithil  here  says:  'That  is  the road  to the  vales of  Tumladen and
  Glossarnach'  (see  note  29);  but   this  was   changed  in   pencil  to
  Lossamach,  and  later  in  the  text  Forlong  the Fat  is named  'lord of
  Lossarnach'.(32)                                                          
    Of the part of the text covered by  the second  draft (pp.  286-7) there
  is little to note, since the final form was already very largely achieved.
  In the 'catalogue' of the peoples of the Outlands the lord of  Anfalas (so
  named) is now Golasgil, as in RK, but the  prince of  Dol Amroth  is still
  not further identified. The conclusion of  the chapter,  not found  in the
  draft, is here almost exactly as in RK. After  the words  (RK p.  45) 'The
  lodging was dark, save for a little lantern  set on  the table'  my father
  first  typed:  'Beside  it  was  a  scribbled note  from Gandalf',  but he
  barred  this  out  immediately  and substituted  'Gandalf was  not there'.
  The  chapter  ends:  'No,  when  the  summons   comes,  not   at  sunrise.
  There will be no sunrise. The darkness has begun.'                        

                             NOTES.                                     
                                                                       
 1. Book V, Chapter 1 'Minas Tirith' is the 44th  chapter in  The Lord
    of  the Rings.  'The Departure  of Boromir'  had now  been separated
    off  from  'The  Riders of  Rohan', 'Flotsam  and Jetsam'  from 'The
    Voice  of  Saruman',  and  'The  Forbidden  Pool'  from  'Journey to
    the Cross-roads'.                                                   
 2. This is the first appearance of the Sons of Elrond (see VII.163-4,
    and p. 297 in this book).                                           
 3. According  to  time-schemes  D  and  S  (p.  272)   Aragorn  reached
    Edoras  and  went  up  Harrowdale  on  the  morning  of  February 5,
    while Theoden came to Dunharrow at nightfall of the 6th.            
 4. This is the first reference to the part played by the Dead  Men of
    Dunharrow.  For  the earliest  hint of  the story  see outline  V on
    p.  263:  'News comes  from South  that a  great king  has descended
    out  of  the  mountains  where he  had been  entombed, and  set such
    a  flame  into  men  that  the  mountaineers  ...  and  the  folk of
    Lebennin   have  utterly   routed  the   Southrons  and   burned  [>
    taken) their ships.'                                                
 5. This was the Nazgul (as  the chronology  was at  this time)  sent out
    from  Mordor  after  Pippin  looked  into  the palantir  of Orthanc,
    passing  high  overhead and  unseen 'about  an hour  after midnight'

  (Plan of Minas Tirith.)

      when  Frodo,  Sam  and  Gollum  had  not  long  left  the pit  among the
      slag-mounds: see pp. 119-20.                                            
  6.  Pippin  on  the  battlements...  sees  the  moonrise on  night of  6 ...
      and thinks of Frodo: see p. 271.                                        
  7.  I presume that the  rejected words  at the  end of  the outline  'do not
                                                                             
      turn  aside  but  go  straight  (on)'  mean that  they passed  the mouth
      of   the   Deeping  Coomb   and  did   not  go   up  to   the  Hornburg.
      According  to  time-scheme  D  (p.  140)   Gandalf  reached   Edoras  at
      dawn  on  February  4,  and  he  stayed  there  throughout  the daylight
      hours.   If  Aragorn   and  his   companions  rode   on  at   all  speed
      making   for   Edoras,   without   any  long   halt,  they   would  have
      caught him up!                                                          
  8.  Thus  the  passage  in  which  Pippin  thinks  of Frodo  remains the
      same  as  in  text  C,  though  with a  difference in  wording: 'little
      thinking  that  Frodo  would  see  from  far   away  the   white  snows
      under   that   same   moon   as  it   set  beyond   Gondor.'  Gandalf's
      journey still takes three nights, not four as in RK.                    
  9.  On  the  First  Map  (Map  III  in  VII.309)  the  distance  from  Minas
      Tirith  to  Osgiliath is  about 70  miles (more  than 23  leagues); and
      on  the  map  made  in  October  1944  that  I have  redrawn on  p. 269
      it is still about 50 miles (which, since in the present draft the fords
      of  Osgiliath  were  a  league  from  the Pelennor  wall, would  give a
      radius of  some 15  and a  half leagues).  In the  note that  my father
      wrote  about  my  1943  version  of  the  First  Map  (see VII.322 note
      1) he said that 'the  distance across  the vale  of Anduin  [should be]
      much  reduced,  so  that  Minas  Tirith  is  close  to   Osgiliath  and
      Osgiliath  closer  to  Minas Morgul';  and the  distance from  the city
      to  the  Rammas  Echor in  the direction  of Osgiliath  is 10  miles on
      my  map  published  in  RK  (on  the  original  map  on which  mine was
      based  12  miles,  agreeing  with  'four  leagues' in  the text  of RK,
      p. 22).                                                                 
                                                                             
 10.  In  the  drawing  the  seventh   gate  faces   in  the   same  direction
      (north-east?)   as   the   second   gate,   but   the  drawing   may  be
      defective: gates 1 - 3 - 5 - 7 are in a line.                           
 11.  In  the  draft,  when  Gandalf  and  Pippin  came  to the  Seventh Gate,
      'the  sun  that  looked  down  on  Ithilien  and   Sam  busy   with  his
      steaming   pan  and   herbs  glowed   on  the   smooth  walls   and  the
      marbled  arch  and  pillars.'  It  was  the morning  of February  6, the
      day  on  which   Frodo  and   Sam  encountered   Faramir  and   went  to
      Henneth  Annun.  In  RK  the  sentence  is  different:  'the   warm  sun
      that  shone  down  beyond  the  river,  as  Frodo  walked in  the glades
      of  Ithilien  ...'  - for  on the  day that  Gandalf and  Pippin arrived
      in  Minas  Tirith  (March  9)   Frodo  and   Sam  reached   the  Morgul-
      road at dusk.                                                           
                                                                             
 12.  This  is  the  first  appearance  of  the  name  Argonath  (see VII.359-
                                                                             
      60, 362).                                                               

  13.  In  LR  (The  Tale  of  Years) it  was the  Steward Ecthelion  I who
       rebuilt  the  White  Tower  in  the  year  2698,  more   than  three
       centuries  before  this  time; Denethor's  father Ecthelion  was the
       second  Steward  of  that  name  (which  derives  from   the  legend
       of the  Fall of  Gondolin: see  II.212, footnote).  - 'The  tower of
       Denethor' was named in the chapter 'The Palantir', p. 77.           
  14.  Vorondil  father  of  Mardil in  RK, p.  27; and  see LR  Appendix A
       (I, ii). - A  space was  left for  the name  of the  god, apparently
       filled in immediately, first with Ramr which  was struck  out before
       completion,  then  with  Araw.   On  Araw   beside  Orome   see  the
       Etymologies, V.379, stem OROM.
  15.  twelve  days ago  (thirteen days  ago in  RK): see  p. 150  and note
       10.  In  The  Tale  of  Years the  dates are  February 26  (death of
       Boromir) and March 9 (Gandalf reaches Minas Tirith).                
  16.  Denethor says  of Pippin's  sword: 'Surely  it is  a sax  wrought by
       our  own  folk  in  the  North  in  the  deep  past?', where  RK has
       'blade'  and  'kindred'.  The  word sax  (Old English  seax, dagger,
       short sword) was the final choice  in the  draft after  rejection of
       'blade', 'knife' and 'dagger'.                                      
  17.  Many  other  pencilled  alterations were  made to  this part  of the
       manuscript,  mostly  to clarify  the writing,  which is  here rather
       rough.  Among  these  the  following  may  be  noted:  as  Beren and
       Pippin  sat  on  the  seat  beside  the  battlement  Beren  said: We
       thought  it  was the  whim our  lord to  take him  a page  boy', and
       this was changed by the  addition of  'after the  manner of  the old
       kings that  had dwarves  in their  service, if  old tales  be true.'
  18.  only twenty  years old  was changed  in pencil  to little  more than
       twenty years old. In RK Pippin told Beregond that  'it will  be four
       years yet before I "come of age", as we say in the Shire.'          
  19.  Of the shadow in the East it  is said  in the  draft: 'Maybe  it was
       mountains  looming  like  clouds  on  the  edge  of  sight  ...  100
       miles  away,.  cf. RK  p. 37:  Perhaps it  was mountains  looming on
       the verge of sight, their jagged edges  softened by  wellnigh twenty
       leagues of misty air.'                                              
  20.  Where in RK (p. 37)  Beregond tells  that the  Fell Riders  won back
       the crossings 'less than  a year  ago', and  that after  Boromir had
       driven the enemy back 'we hold still the near half of Osgiliath', in
       the draft Beren says: 'And the Fell  Riders but  a little  while ago
       [?two]  years  or  more  won  back  the  crossings and  came [?over]
       into this western land. But Boromir  drove them  back. And  still we
       hold the crossings.'                                                
  21.  Beren says as in RK that 'some say that as he sits alone in his high
       chamber  in the  Tower at  night ...  he can  even read  somewhat of
       the mind of the Enemy'; he does  not speak  of 'wrestling',  nor add
       the words 'And so it is that he is old, worn before his time.'      

                                                                    
                                                                          
  22. The coming of the great fleet from the  south is  referred to  in all
      but one of the outlines given in the last chapter. In the draft Beren
      says  of  the Corsairs  of Umbar  that they  have 'long  forsaken the
      suzerainty of Gondor'  ('long ceased  to fear  the might  of Gondor',
      RK). And he says  of the  fleet: 'Now  that will  draw off  much help
      that  we  might  look  to  from  Lebennin  south  away   between  the
      mountains  and  the  Sea,  where  folk  are numerous.'  Thus Belfalas
      is not named, as it is in RK ('from Lebennin  and Belfalas',  p. 38).
      The  name Belfalas  was originally  applied to  the coastal  lands in
      the  west  subsequently  named  Anfalas  (Langstrand):   this  change
      was  made  to  the  First  Map  and  the  1943  map  (VII.309  - 10).
      Precisely  where  my   father  placed   Belfalas  when   Anfalas  was
      substituted  is  not  clear,  but  his note  correcting the  1943 map
      (VII.322  note  1)   says:  'Lebennin   should  be   Belfalas'.  That
      Belfalas was in  the region  of the  Mouths of  Anduin might  seem to
      be suggested by  the passage  describing the  journey of  the funeral
      boat  in  drafting  for  'The Departure  of Boromir'  (VII.382): 'and
      the  voices  of  a thousand  seabirds lamented  him upon  the beaches
      of Belfalas'; but Belfalas seems to have retained its  original sense
      up to this time,  since it  was replaced  by Dor-Anfalas  in drafting
      for  the present  chapter (p.  287). On  the Second  Map (by  a later
      addition) it is placed as on the map  published in  LR (see  pp. 434,
      437).                                                                
  23. - At this point my  father scribbled  down some  very rough  notes in
      pencil,  but  the  following  paragraph  ('Beren  was  on  duty ...')
      was then written  over them,  so that  they are  hard to  read: 'rude
      boy  of  the  City  Gates  password  Gir  ..  edlothiand   na  ngalad
      melon  i  ni  (?sevo]  ni  (?edranj.  Sees  the  hosts  ride  in from
      Lebennin.'                                                           
  24. Written in the margin here:  'He is  called Thalion,  and my  name is
      Ramloth.'  Beneath  Ramloth  is  written  Gwinhir,  and at  the first
      occurrence  of  the  boy's  name  in the  actual narrative  my father
      began  Ram,  changed  it  to   Arad,  and   then  wrote   Gwinhir.  -
      Thalion 'steadfast' was the 'surname' of Hurin.                      
  25. I am 21 years old: see note 18.                                      
  26. Added  here:  'But  do  not  speak  so  darkly.' I  do not  know what
      this refers to. Perhaps Pippin's  concluding sentence,  consisting of
      three  or  four  wholly  illegible  words,  was  equally  obscure  to
      Thalion.                                                             
  27. The greeting of Gondor is still 'with  outstretched hand',  not 'with
      hands upon the breast'; and  Pippin still  says that  he is  21 years
      old (see note 25).                                                   
  28. For the earliest form of the 'catalogue', bearing little  relation to
      this,  see  p.  252.  The  name  Forlong  the Fat  is written  on the
      manuscript  of  'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Fangorn',  p.  229,  but
      this is obviously not contemporary with that outline.                

  29.  G  was  written  before  Lossarnach,  but  struck  out  before  Lossar-
       nach was entered: see p. 289.                                          
  30.  This  passage  was  afterwards  rejected  and  replaced by  a carefully
       written rider, introducing the description as  it stands  in RK  p. 22,
       with  the  name   Rammas  Echor,   and  mention   of  Emyn   Arnen, the
       Harlond,  Lossarnach,  'Lebennin  with  its  five  swift  streams', and
       Imrahil of Dol Amroth 'in the great  fief of  Belfalas'. As  this rider
       was  first  written,  'the  quays  and  landings  of the  Harlond' were
       'the quays and landings of Lonnath-Ernin'.                             
  31.  The  two  cross  lines  above  and  below  the  word  'Rider'  reversed
       show  through  from  the  other  side of  the page:  this is  the rider
       referred  to  in  note  30.  - The  reference to  the sun  looking down
       on  'Sam  busy  with  his  steaming  pan  and  herbs'  (see   note  11)
       remained,  but  was  altered  in  pencil  to 'the  warm sun  that shone
       down  beyond   the  River,   as  Frodo   saying  farewell   to  Faramir
       walked in the glades  of Ithilien'  (in RK  the words  'saying farewell
       to  Faramir'  are absent).  The altered  text represents  the synchron-
       ization   discussed   in   the  Note   on  Chronology   below,  whereby
       Frodo   left   Henneth   Annun   on   the   same  morning   as  Gandalf
       reached Minas Tirith.                                                  
  32.  The  treatment  in  this text  of other  differences of  detail between
       the  original  draft  and  RK  may  be  mentioned  here.  The  descrip-
       tion of the livery  and helms  of the  guards of  the Citadel  (p. 279)
       now   becomes   precisely   as   in  RK;   but  Gandalf's   words  'And
       Denethor  at  least  does  not  expect him  in any  guise, for  he does
       not  know  that  he exists'  remain. Denethor  still declares  that the
       horn  was  heard  blowing  upon  the   northern  marches   twelve  days
       ago  (note 15),  and he  still calls  Pippin's sword  a sax  (note 16).
       Berithil is still clad in grey and white, and his reference to 'the old
       kings  that had  dwarves in  their service'  remains (note  17). Pippin
       tells him that he has  'not long  passed twenty  years' (note  18), and
       later tells  Bergil that  he is  'nearly twenty-one'  (p. 284).  Of the
       mountains  in  the  East  it is  said that  'their jagged  edges [were]
       softened  by  wellnigh  a  hundred  miles  of  misty  air'  (note  19).
       Berithil  says  that  'the  Fell Riders,  but two  years ago,  won back
       the  crossings'  (note  20);  his  words  about  Denethor in  the Tower
       are  now  precisely  as  in  RK  (note  21);  and  he  says   that  the
       Corsairs  of  Umbar  'have  long  forsaken  the friendship  of Gondor',
       and again does not  mention Belfalas  as a  source of  aid to  the city
       (note 22).                                                             
                                                                             
                             Note on the Chronology.                          
                                                                             
  In  the  chapter  'Journey  to  the  Cross-roads'  (pp.  175 ff.)  Frodo and
  Sam  left  Henneth  Annun  in  the  morning  of February  7 and  reached the
  Osgiliath road at dusk of  that day.  During the  night of  February 7  - 8

  the air  became  heavy,  and  dark clouds  moved out  of the  East during
  the morning  of  the  8th; they  reached the  Cross-roads at  sunset, and
  saw the sun 'finding at last  the hem  of the  great slow-rolling  pall of
  cloud'.                                                                  
     In the present chapter Gandalf and Pippin arrived  at Minas  Tirith at
  sunrise on February 6, and in the note added to  the original  draft (see
  p. 286) my father said that the  sunset of  that day  was to  be ominous,
  with the  Darkness  beginning  next  morning,  the  7th.  There is  thus a
  Jay  out between  'Journey to  the Cross-roads'  and 'Minas  Tirith'. (In
  the outlines for  Book V  given in  the last  chapter the  Darkness begins
  on The 8th in outlines III and V, but on the 7th in outline VI.)        
     I  cannot  certainly  explain  this. Presumably  my father  had intro-
  duced  a  change  in the  chronology of  the movements  of Frodo  and Sam
  in Ithilien, or at any rate intended to, and  it may  be that  the rather
  obscure note given on p. 271 is  connected with  this: 'Whole  of Frodo's
  and  Sam's  adventures  must  be  set back  one day,  so that  Frodo sees
  moon-set  on  morning  (early  hours)  of  Feb.  6,  and  Faramir reaches
  Minas Tirith on  night of  the 7th,  and Great  Darkness begins  on 7th.'
  This gives the following relations (and see note 31 above):             
     Feb.  6  Frodo  leaves  Henneth  Annun;  reaches  Osgiliath   road  at
  dusk.                                                                   
              Gandalf reaches Minas Tirith. Ominous sunset.               
     Feb.  7  Great  Darkness  begins.  Frodo  reaches Cross-roads  at sun-
              set.                                                                    
     See  further  the  note  on chronology  on pp.  321 -  2. -  The final
  synchronization of the stories east  and west  of Anduin  was differently
  achieved, with extension  of Gandalf's  ride to  Minas Tirith  from three
  nights  to four  (p. 264  note 3),  and of  Frodo's journey  from Henneth
  Annun  from  two  days  to three  (p. 182).  Thus in  The Tale  of Years
  in LR:                                                                  
     March 8 Frodo leaves Henneth Annun.                                  
     March  9  Gandalf  reaches  Minas  Tirith. At  dusk Frodo  reaches the
  Morgul-road     [=     Osgiliath     road].     Darkness     begins    to
  flow out of Mordor.                                                     
     March 10 The Dawnless Day. Frodo passes the Cross Roads.             

                                    IV.                                  
                                                                        
                       MANY ROADS LEAD EASTWARD (1).                     
                                                                        
 The  original  draft   ('A')  for   Chapter  XLV   (Book  V   Chapter  2,
 afterwards  called  'The  Passing of  the Grey  Company') was  written in
 pencil  in  my  father's  roughest script,  and extended  only as  far as
 Theoden's  words  about  the  Rangers:  'thirty  such   men  will   be  a
 strength not to be counted by heads' (RK p. 48). At this stage,  I think,
 he wrote a brief outline for the next part of the chapter which  takes up
 from the point reached in A.                                            
                                                                        
  The  night  was  old  and  the  East  grey  when  they  came at  last to
 the Hornburg and there rested.                                          
  Rangers   say   that   messages   reached   them    through   Rivendell.
 They suppose Gandalf or Galadriel or both?                              
  Merry  sat  at  the  king's  side  in  Hornburg,  regrets   that  Pippin
 was away.                                                               
  They   prepare   to   ride   by  secret   ways  to   Dunharrow.  Aragorn
 does  not  sleep  but  becomes  restless.  Takes  the  Orthanc  stone  to
 the tower of the Hornburg and looks in it.                              
  He   comes   out   of  the   chamber  looking   very  weary,   and  will
 say naught but goes to sleep till evening.                              
  'There  is  evil  news,'  he  said.  'The  black  fleet is  drawing near
 to  Umbar  [sic].  That  will  disturb  counsels.  I  fear we  must part,
 Eomer.  To  meet  again  later.  But  not  yet.  How  long  will  it take
 to  Dunharrow?'  'Two  days.  If  we  ride  on  the  5th  we  shall reach
 there by evening of the 6th.'(1)                                        
  Aragorn fell silent. 'That will do,' he said.                          
                                                                        
  The  reverse  of  this  page  is  a  contoured  map  of the  White Moun-
 tains, ruled in squares of 2 cm. side, extending some  90 miles  east and
 west  of  Edoras,  with no  features (other  than mountain  peaks) marked
 save the Morthond and  the Stone  of Erech  in the  south and  Edoras and
 the  Snowbourn  in  the  north.  Harrowdale  here runs  a little  west of
 south, in contrast to  the map  redrawn on  p. 258  where it  runs south-
 east, and Erech  is a  very little  east of  south from  Edoras (assuming
 that  the  map  is oriented  north-south). A  pencilled note  against the
 Stone  of  Erech  gives a  distance: '62  miles as  crow flies  from Dun-
 harrow' (where  the second  figure seems  to have  been changed  from 3);
 and in the margin is  written: 'Scale  4 times  main map'.  Whichever map

                                                                         
                                                                          
 my  father  was referring to (2) this  would mean  that 1  mm. =  1.25 miles;
 and  a  dot pencilled  in subsequently  very near  the head  of Harrowdale
 and obviously  representing the  place of  Dunharrow is  at a  distance of
 51 mm. from the Stone of Erech (= 63.75 miles).(3)                        
                                                                          
   He  now  returned  to  the  opening  of  the  chapter and  overwrote the
 brief pencilled text in ink, so that it is obscured.(4)                   
   The new draft ('B') in ink,  as far  as the  point where  the underlying
 pencilled text ends, reaches that of  RK (pp.  46 -  8) in  all but  a few
 points. In the  opening paragraph  of the  chapter it  is said  of Merry's
 possessions  only  that  'he  had  few  things  to  pack',  and  this  was
 bracketed,. at the head of  the page  my father  wrote: Hobbit  packs lost
 at  Calembel?  replenished  at Isengard'  (for Calembel  see the  Index to
 Vol.  VII,  s.v. Calenbel).  To Aragorn's  words 'But  why they  come, and
 bow  many  they  are,  Halbarad (5) shall  tell  us Halbarad  replies, Thirty
 we  are,  and  the  brethren  Elboron  and Elbereth  are among  them. More
 of  us  could  scarcely  be  found in  these dwindling  days, as  you well
 know;   and   we   had   to  gather   in  haste.   We  came   because  you
 summoned  us.  Is  that not  so? To  which Aragorn  replies: Nay,  save in
 wish.'(6)                                                                 
   The coming of the  sons of  Elrond with  the Rangers  is referred  to in
 the outline given on p. 274. It is interesting to see that the names first
 given  to  them,  Elboron  and  Elbereth,  were  originally  those  of the
 young  sons  of  Dior  Thingol's Heir,  the brothers  of Elwing,  who were
 murdered  by 'the  evil men  of Maidros'  host' in  the attack  on Doriath
 by  the  Feanorians  (The  Annals  of Beleriand,  in IV.307,  V.142); they
 were  thus  the  great-uncles  of  the  sons  of  Elrond.  But  the  names
 Elboron  and  Elbereth  of  Dior's  sons  had been  replaced by  Elrun and
 Eldun (IV.325-6; V.147, 351-3; VI.68).                                    
   The  new  draft  B  continues  on   from  the   point  reached   in  the
 pencilled  opening, but  the passage  that immediately  follows in  RK (in
 which  Elrohir  son  of Elrond  delivers his  father's message  to Aragorn
 concerning  the  Paths  of  the Dead,  and Aragorn  asks Halbarad  what it
 is that he bears) is entirely absent. The text continues (RK p. 48):      
                                                                          
   The night was old and the East grey when they rode at last up           
 from  the  Deeping  Coomb  and  came  back  to   the  Hornburg.           
 There they were to lie and rest for a while and take counsel.             
   Merry slept, until he was roused by  Legolas and  Gimli. 'The           
 sun is high,' said [Gimli >] Legolas. 'Everyone else is out and           
 about. Come and look round. There was a great battle  here only           
 three  nights  ago.  I  would show  you where  the Huorn-forest           
 stood.'                                                                   
   'Is there not time to visit the Caves?' said Gimli.                     
   'I have given my word to go with you,' said Legolas. 'But let           

 that be later and  do not  spoil the  wonder with  haste. It  is near
 the  hour  of  noon,  and  after  we  have  eaten we  are to  set out
 swiftly, or so I hear.'                                              
   Merry  sighed;  he  was  lonely  without  Pippin  and felt  that he
 was  only  a  burden,  while  everybody  was   making  plans   for  a
 business he did not much understand.                                 
   'Aragorn  has  a  company  of  his  own  now,'  said   Gimli.  '[He
 seems  changed  somewhat,  and  some  dark  care   is  on   him.  But
 [he]  looks  more  like  a  king  than  Theoden  himself.](7) They  are
 stout  men  and  lordly.  The  Riders  look  almost like  boys beside
 them;  for  they  are  grim  and  worn  for  the  most part,  such as
 Aragorn  was.  But  he  seems  changed  somewhat:  a  kingly  man  if
 ever  there  was  one,  though  some  dark  care  or  doubt  sits  on
 him.'                                                                
   'Where is he?' said Merry.                                         
   'In  a  high  chamber  in  the  tower,'  said  Gimli.  'He  has not
 rested or slept,  I think.  He went  there soon  after we  came here,
 saying  he  must  take  thought,  and   only  his   kinsman  Halbarad
 went with him.'                                                      
   Merry  walked   about  with   Legolas  and   Gimli  for   a  while,
 while  they  spoke  of this  and that  turn of  the battle;  and they
 passed  the  ruined  gate  and  the  mounds of  the fallen,  and they
 stood  upon  the  dike  looking  down  the   Coomb.  The   Dead  Down
 stood  black  and  tall  and  stony  amid  the  trampled  grass.  The
 Dunlanders  and  other  men  of  the  garrison  were  busy  here  and
 there, on the dyke and in  the fields  or on  the battered  walls. At
 length  they  returned  and  went  to  the  meal in  the hall  of the
 burg. There Merry was called and was set beside the King.            
                                                                     
   The conversation of Merry with Theoden, leading to the offer of his
 service and its acceptance, is virtually the same as in RK (pp. 50-1)
 and need not be cited. Then follows:                                 
                                                                     
   They  spoke  together for  a while.  Then Eomer  said: 'It  is near
 the  hour  we  set  for  our  departing.  Shall I  bid men  sound the
 horns?  And  where  is Aragorn?  His place  is empty  and he  has not
 eaten.'                                                              
   The  horns  were   sounded  and   men  got   ready  to   ride,  the
 Riders  of  Rohan  now  in  a  great  company,   for  the   King  was
 leaving  but a  small garrison  in the  Burg, and  all that  could be
 spared  were  riding  to  the  muster  with  him.  A  thousand spears
 had  already  ridden  away  at  night  to Edoras;  and yet  now there

   were still some three hundred or more that had gathered from
   the fields about.
     In a group by themselves were the Rangers. They were clad in
   dark grey and their horses were rough-haired. Hoods were over
   the[ir] helms. They [?wore] spear and bow and sword. There
   was nothing fine or splendid in their array, no sign or badge,
   save this only, that each cloak was pinned on the left shoulder
   by a silver brooch shaped like a rayed star.(8) Dark and sombre
   and proud men they looked.
     Presently Eomer came out of the gate of the Burg, and with
   him came Halbarad and Aragorn. They came down the ramp
   and walked to the waiting horses. Merry sitting on his pony by
   the King was startled by Aragorn. He looked grim, grey-faced,
   weary, old, and leant a little on Halbarad.                            
      'I have evil tidings, lord,' he said standing before the King. 'A
   grave  peril  unlooked  for  threatens  Gondor.  A  great  fleet  is
   drawing near from the south, and will  cut off  all but  scanty help
   from  that  region.  From  Rohan  alone  can  they expect  much help
   now.  But  I  must  take  new counsel.  I fear,  lord, and  Eomer my
   friend,  we must  part -  to meet  again, maybe,  or maybe  not. But
   how long will you take to reach Dunharrow?'                         
      'It is now an hour after noon,'  said Eomer.  'On the  evening of
   the  second  day  from  now  we  should come  there. That  night the
   moon  will  rise  full,  and  the  muster  that  the  King commanded
   will begin the day after.'(9)                                       
      Aragorn fell silent as if considering. 'Two  days,' he  said. 'It
   cannot  be  much  speeded.  Well,  by  your  leave,  lord,   I  will
   forsake this secrecy. The time for it is passed for  me. I  will eat
   now and then I and my rangers  will ride  as swift  as steed  may go
   direct  to  Edoras.  We  shall  meet  at  Dunharrow  ere   we  part.
   Farewell.  May  I  commit  my  friend  and  charge Meriadoc  to your
   care?'                                                              
                                                                      
      'No need,' said  Theoden, 'he  has sworn  himself to  my service.
   He is my esquire.'                                                  
      'Good,' said Aragorn. 'All that you do is kingly. Farewell.'     
      'Goodbye,   Meriadoc,'   said  Gimli,   'but  we're   going  with
   Aragorn. It seems that he needs us. But we'll  meet again,  I think.
   And yours for the present is the  better road,  I think.  Jogging on
   a nice pony, while I cling on behind  Legolas and  try to  keep pace
   with these Rangers!'                                                
      'Farewell,' said Merry regretfully.                              
      A  horn  was  sounded  and the  Riders set  forth, and  rode down

 the  Coomb,  and  turning  swiftly west  [read east]  took a  path that
 skirted  the  foothills  for  a  mile  or  so and  then turned  back in
 among the hills and slopes and disappeared.                            
   Aragorn   watched   until   the   King's  men   were  far   down  the
 Coomb.  Then  he  turned  to  Halbarad.  'I  must  eat,' he  said, 'and
 then  we  must  speed   on  our   way.  Come   Legolas  and   Gimli.  I
 would speak to you as I eat.'                                          
                                                                       
 'Well,'  said  Aragorn as  he sat  at the  table in  the hall.  'I have
 looked  in  the  Stone,  my  friends.  For  my  heart  [foreboded that]
 told me that there was much to learn.'                                 
   'You   looked  in   the  Stone!'   said  Gimli,   amazed,  awestruck,
 and rather alarmed. 'What did you tell - him?'                         
   'What  did  i  tell  him?'  said  Aragorn   sternly,  and   his  eyes
 glinted.  'That  I had  a rascal  of a  rebel dwarf  here that  I would
 exchange  for  a  couple  of  good  orcs,  thank you!  I thought  I had
 the  strength,  and  the  strength  I  had.  I said  naught to  him and
 wrenched  the  Stone  from  him  to   my  own   purpose.  But   he  saw
 me, yes  and he  saw me  in other  guise maybe  than you  see me.  If I
 have done ill I have done  ill. But  I do  not think  so. To  know that
 I  lived  and  walked  the  earth  was  something  of  a  blow  to  his
 heart, and certainly  he will  now hasten  all his  strokes -  but they
 will  be  the  less  ripe.  And  then  I learned  much. For  one thing,
 that there are yet  other Stones.  One is  at Erech  and that  is where
 we  are  going.  [Struck  out:  At  the  Stone   of  Erech   Men  shall
 ... be seen.]' Halbarad bears this message:                            
    Out  of  the  mountain   shall  they   come  their   tryst  keeping;
 at    the    Stone     of    Erech     their    horn     shall    blow,
 when    hope    is     dead  and  the    kings     are    sleeping
 and darkness lies on the world below:                                  
    Three    lords    shall    come    from    the     three    kindreds
 from   the   North    at   need    by   the    paths   of    the   dead
 elflord,         dwarflord,  and  lord forwandred,
 and one shall wear a crown on head.(11)                                
 And  that  is  an  old  rhyme   of  Gondor   which  none   have  under-
 stood;  but  I  think  I  perceive somewhat  of its  sense now.  To the
 Stone  of  Erech  by  the  paths  of  the Dead!'  he said  rising. 'Who
 will come with me?'                                                    
                                                                       
   The last two sentences were inked in over pencil, and the rest of the
 text consists of jottings in ink and pencil. These begin:              
                                                                       
   So now all roads were running together to the East and the           
 coming of the War. And even as Pippin stood at the  Gate and           

 saw the Prince of Dol Amroth ride into the city with his banners            
 the King of Rohan came down out of the hills.                               
                                                                           
 This  is  the  beginning  of  'The  Muster   of  Rohan'   in  RK.(12) It  is
 followed  by  a  sketch  of  the  Starkhorn,  and  then  by  rough drafting
 developing  the  conversation  of  Theoden  and  Eomer  as  they  came into
 Harrowdale  nearer  to  its form  in RK.  On the  significance of  this see
 pp, 306-7.                                                                 
                                                                           
   This  draft  was  followed (as  I judge,  immediately) by  another ('C'),
 numbered  'XLV'  but  without  title,  more clearly  written, but  not much
 advancing  on  its  predecessor.  At  the beginning  of the  chapter, Merry
 'had  few  things  to  bring,  for  the  hobbits  had  lost their  packs at
 Calembel  (Calledin),  and  though   Merry  and   Pippin  had   found  some
 new  ones  at  Isengard  and  had picked  up a  few necessaries,  they made
 only a light bundle' (see p. 297).  In the  conversation of  Legolas, Gimli
 and  Merry  at  the  Hornburg (RK  p. 49)  Legolas now  speaks of  the sons
 of  Elrond,  still  named  Elboron  and  Elbereth  (and  it  is   only  now
 actually made clear  who these  were, cf.  p. 297):  'Sombre is  their gear
 like the others', but they are fair and gallant as Elven-lords. And that is
 not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  they  are  the  own  sons  of   Elrond  of
 Rivendell.'  From  Merry's  question   'Why  have   they  come?   Have  you
 heard?'  the  conversation  then  proceeds  as  in  RK, with  Gimli quoting
 the  message  that  came  to  Rivendell  and ascribing  it to  Gandalf, and
 Legolas  suggesting  that  it  came  more   likely  from   Galadriel.(13) Ara-
 gorn's  horse  Roheryn,  brought  by  the Rangers  (RK p.  51) has  not yet
 entered (when he left for  Edoras he  still rode  Hasufel), nor  is Merry's
 pony  (Stybba  in  RK)  yet  given  a  name;  but  the  sons of  Elrond are
 described in  the same  words as  in RK,  and their  armour of  bright mail
 cloaked  in  silver-grey  (thus  apparently contradicting  Legolas' earlier
 remark  'Sombre  is their  gear like  the others'  ', where  in RK  he says
 'Less sombre is their gear than the others' ').                            
   When  Aragorn  came  from  the  gate  of  the Burg  the new  text follows
 the earlier closely (pp. 299 - 300), but he does not name the  'grave peril
 unlooked  for'  that  threatens  Gondor, and  he no  longer says  'We shall
 meet  at  Dunharrow  ere  we  part',  but  'I  shall be  gone ere  you come
 there,  if  my  purpose  holds'.  His  account  of  his  looking  into  the
 palantir  of  Orthanc  is  somewhat  developed,   though  his   sarcasm  to
 Gimli remains; from his words 'If I have done ill  I have  done ill,  but I
 do not think so' this text continues:                                      
                                                                           
 'To know that I lived and walked the  earth was  a blow  to his            
 heart, I deem, for  he knew  it not  till now.  But he  has not            
 forgotten the sword of Isildur or his maimed hand and  the pain            
 that lives ever with him. That in this very  hour of  his great            
 designs the heir of Isildur should be revealed and the sword of            

                            
                                                                            
  Elendil  -  for  I  showed  him   that  -   will  disturb   his  counsels.
  Certainly  now  he  will  hasten  all  his strokes,  but the  hasty stroke
  goes often wild.                                                           
     'And   I  learned   much.  For   one  thing,   that  there   are  other
  Stones  yet  preserved  in  this  ancient  land.  One  is  at  Erech.  And
  thither  we  are  going.  To  the  Stone  of  Erech,  if  we can  find and
  dare the Paths of the Dead.'                                               
     'The  Paths  of  the  Dead?'  said  Gimli.  'That  has  a   fell  name!
  Where does it lie?'                                                        
     'I  do  not  know  yet,'  said  Aragorn.  'But  I  know  much  old lore
  of   these   lands,   and   I   have   learned   much   myself   in   many
  journeys;  and  I  have  a  guess.  To  prove  it we  shall ride  fast ere
  the  day  is  much  older.  But  harken,  here  is  an  old  rhyme  of  my
  kindred,  almost  forgotten.  It  was  not   said  openly,   but  Halbarad
  tells  me  that  the  message  that  came  to  Rivendell  ended  so.  "Bid
  Aragorn remember the dark words of old:                                    
        Out of the mountain shall they come their tryst keeping;             
        At the Stone of Erech their horns shall blow                         
                                                                            
     The  only  differences  in  this  form  of  the verse  from that  in the
  previous draft B (p. 300) are: horns for horn in line 2;  lost for  dead in
  line 3; shadow for darkness in line 4; and man for lord in line 7.         
                                                                            
     This text C was very  substantially altered,  by pencilled  changes, and
  by the substitution of rewritten pages  to replace  existing ones.  I doubt
  that  much  time  if  any  elapsed  between  the  initial  writing  of  the
  manuscript  and  the making  of these  changes: my  impression is  that the
  text as first written ended at this point, with 'the dark words of old', at
  almost the same point as the  preceding draft  B ended  (p. 300),  and that
  my father at once began to develop it further.                             
     The  points  in  which B  differed from  RK, mentioned  in note  6, were
  now all  altered to  the final  form (save  that the  name Dunadan  had not
  yet  arisen);  and  while  Elboron  remained,   Elbereth  was   changed  to
  Elrohir.  The  passage  (RK  p.  48)  in  which  Elrohir  delivers Elrond's
  message   to   Aragorn,   and   Halbarad  speaks   the  message   of  Arwen
  accompanying  her  gift,  is  still  altogether  lacking;  but   after  the
  description of the Rangers (RK p. 51) the following was inserted:          
                                                                            
  Halbarad their leader carried a tall staff, upon which it seemed           
  was a great standard, but it was close-furled and covered with a           
  black cloth bound about it with many thongs.                               
                                                                            
     A  major  rewriting (14) was  inserted into  the C  manuscript at  the point
  where  Aragorn  came  from the  gate of  the Burg;  the text  of RK  is now

 much more  nearly  approached,  yet  not  reached, for  Aragorn seeks
 knowledge of the Paths of the  Dead, whereas  in RK  (p. 52)  he does
 not.                                                                 
                                                                     
    'I am troubled in mind, lord,' he said, standing by the king's
 stirrup. 'Strange words have I heard and I see new perils afar        
 off, I have laboured  long in  thought, and  now I  fear that  I must
 change  my  purpose.  But  tell me,  Theoden, what  do you  know in
 this land of the Paths of the Dead?'                                  
    'The  Paths of  the Dead!  ' said  Theoden. 'Why  do you  speak of
 them?'  Eomer  turned  and  gazed  at  Aragorn,  and  it   seemed  to
 Merry that the faces  of the  Riders that  sat within  hearing turned
 pale at the words, and he wondered what they could mean.             
    'Because I would learn where they are,' said Aragorn.             
    'I  do  not know  if indeed  there be  such paths,'  said Theoden;
 'but their gate  stands in  Dunharrow, if  old lore  be true  that is
 seldom spoken aloud.'                                                
    'In  Dunharrow!'  said  Aragorn.  'And  you  are  riding  thither.
 How long will it be ere you come there?'                             
    'It is now two  hours past  noon,' said  Eomer. 'Before  the night
 of  the  second  day  from  now  we  should  come  to the  Hold. That
 night the moon will rise at the full,  and the  muster that  the king
 commanded  will   begin  the   day  after.   More  speed   we  cannot
 make, if the strength of Rohan is to be gathered.'                   
    Aragorn  was  silent  for  a  moment.  'Two  days,'  he  murmured,
 'and then the muster  of Rohan  will only  be begun.  But I  see that
 it  cannot now  be hastened.'  He looked  up, and  it seemed  that he
 had made some decision; his face was less troubled.                  
    'Well,  by  your  leave,  lord,  I  must  take  new  counsel.  For
 myself  and  my  kindred, we  will now  be secret  no longer.  For me
 the  time of  stealth has  passed. I  will make  ready now,  and then
 with my  own folk  I will  ride the  straight and  open way  with all
 speed  to  Edoras,  and  thence  to  Dunharrow,  and  thence   -  who
 shall say?'                                                          
   'Do  as  you  will,'  said Theoden.  'Your foes  are mine;  but let
 each  fight  as  his  wisdom  guides  him.  Yet now  I must  take the
 mountain-roads and delay no longer. Farewell! '                      
   'Farewell, Aragorn!' said Eomer. 'It is a grief to  me that  we do
 not ride together.'                                                  
                                                                     
         'Yet in battle we may meet again, though all the hosts of
 Mordor should lie between,' said Aragorn.                            
   'If you seek the Paths of the Dead,' said Eomer, 'then it is little

 likely  that  we  shall meet  among living  men. Yet  maybe it  is your
 doom to tread strange ways that others dare not.'                      
   'Goodbye,  Aragorn!'  said  Merry.  'I  did  not  wish to  be parted
 from   the   remnant   of  our   Company,  but   I  have   entered  the
 King's service.'                                                       
   'I could not wish you better fortune,' said Aragorn.                 
   'Goodbye,  my  lad,'  said  Gimli.  'I  am sorry,  but Legolas  and I
 are  sworn  to  go  with  Aragorn.  He says  that he  needs us.  Let us
 hope  the  Company  will  be  gathered  again  some  day.  And  for the
 next  stage  yours will  be the  better road,  I think.  As you  jog on
 your  pony,  think  of  me  clinging  here,   while  Legolas   vies  at
 horse-racing with those fell Rangers yonder.'                          
   'Till  we   meet  again!'   said  Legolas.   'But  whatever   way  we
 chose,  I see  a dark  path and  hard before  each of  us ere  the end.
 Farewell! '                                                            
                                                                       
   The text then  continues with  Merry's sad  farewell, and  the depar-
 ture  of  the  Riders  down the  Coomb (in  this text  spelt throughout
 Combe),  but  Aragorn's  words  with  Halbarad  about  Merry   and  the
 Shire-folk  are  absent.  Aragorn's  account  of the  Orthanc-stone was
 now rewritten again, with various minor changes bringing the text still
 closer  to  that in  RK (his  words 'The  eyes in  Orthanc did  not see
 through  the  armour of  Theoden' are  however not  present: see  p. 77
 and note 17). But in answer to Gimli's objection  'But he  wields great
 dominion, nevertheless, and now he will move  more swiftly'  he replies
 in this revised version:                                               
                                                                       
   'The  hasty  stroke  goes  often  astray,'  said  Aragorn.  'And  his
 counsels  will  be  disturbed.  See,  my friends,  when I  had mastered
 the  Stone  I  learned  many  things.  A  grave  peril  I   saw  coming
 unlooked-for  upon   Gondor  from   the  South   that  will   draw  off
 great  strength  from  the  defence  of  Minas  Tirith.  And  there are
 other   movements   in   the   North.   But   now  he   will  hesitate,
 doubting  whether  the  heir  of  Isildur   hath  that   which  Isildur
 took  from  him,  and  thinking  that he  must win  or lose  all before
 the gates of the City. If so, that  is well,  as well  as an  evil case
 may be.                                                                
   'Another  thing  I  learned.  There  are  other Stones  yet preserved
 in  this  ancient land.  One is  at Erech.  Thither I  will go.  To the
 Stone of Erech, if we can find the Paths of the Dead.'                 
   The  Paths  of  the  Dead!  said  Gimli.  That  is  a fell  name, and
 little to the  liking of  the men  of Rohan,  as I  saw. Where  do they
 lie, and why must we seek them?'                                       

 'I  do  not  yet  know  where  they  lie,'  said  Aragorn.   'But  in
 Dunharrow  it  seems   that  we   may  learn   the  answer.   To  Dun-
 harrow at the swiftest, then, I will go.'                              
   'And you would have us ride with you?' said Legolas.                
   'Of your  free will  I would,'  said Aragorn.  'For not  by chance,
 I deem,  are  we  three  now left  together of  the Company.  We have
 some  part  to  play together.  Listen! Here  is an  old rhyme  of my
 kindred, almost forgotten, never understood.                          
    The days are numbered; the kings are sleeping.                    
      It is darkling time, the shadows grow.                          
    Out   of   the   Mountain   they   come,   their   tryst  keeping;
 at the Stone of Erech horns they blow.                               
    Three    lords     I    see     from    the     three    kindreds:
 halls forgotten in the hills they tread,                             
    Elpord, Dwarflord, Man forwandred,
 from the North they come by the Paths of the Dead!(15)               
 Why does this  point to  us, you  may ask.  I deem  it fits  the hour
 too  well  for  chance. Yet  if more  is needed:  the sons  of Elrond
 bring  this  word  from  their  father  in  Rivendell:  "Bid  Aragorn
 remember the Paths of the Dead."                                     
   'Come  then!'  Aragorn  rose  and  drew  his  sword and  it flashed
 in  the  twilight  of  the dim  hall of  the Burg.  'To the  Stone of
 Erech! I seek the Paths of the Dead! Come with me who will!'        
   Legolas  and  Gimli  answered  nothing,  but  they  rose  also  and
 followed  Aragorn  from  the   hall.  There   on  the   green  waited
 silently   the   hooded   Rangers.   Legolas   and   Gimli   mounted.
 Aragorn  sprang  on  Hasufel.  Then  Halbarad  lifted  a  great  horn
 and  the blast  of it  echoed in  Helm's Deep;  and they  leapt away,
 tiding  down  the  Combe  like  thunder,  while  all  the   men  that
 were left on Dike or Burg stared in amaze.                           
                                                                     
   The last page of the manuscript carries the words pencilled  at the
 end of version B (p. 300): 'So now all roads were running together to
    East ?..', the paragraph that opens 'The Muster of Rohan'  in The
 Return of the King.                                                  
                                                                     
   At this point my father typed a fair copy, which I will call 'M',(16)
 very closely based on the manuscript  C as  revised. This  text, numbered
 'XLV',  bore  the  title  'Many  Roads  Lead  Eastward'.  Only   a  few
 passages  need  be  noted.  I  have  mentioned (p.  304) that  after the
 departure  of  Theoden   from  the   Hornburg  'Aragorn's   words  with
 Halbarad about Merry and the Shire-folk  are absent'  in C  revised; but
 the forerunner of the passage in RK (p. 53) now appears:              

   Aragorn   rode   to   the  Dike   and  watched   till  the   king's  men
 were   far  down   the  Combe.   Then  he   turned  to   Halbarad.  'There
 go  three  that  I  love,'  he  said,  'and not  least the  hobbit, Merry,
 most   dearly.   For   all  our   love  and   dooms,  Halbarad,   and  our
 deeds  of  arms, still  they have  a great  worth, that  greatheart little
 people;  and  it  is  for  them  that  we do  battle, as  much as  for any
 glory  of Gondor.  And yet  fate divides.  Well, so  it is.  1 must  eat a
 little, and then we too must haste away ...'(17)                          
                                                                          
   Secondly, after Aragorn's words, 'If so that is well, as well as an evil
 case can be' (p. 304) he now continues:                                   
                                                                          
 '... These  deadly strokes  upon our  flanks will  be weakened.           
 And we have a little room in which to play.                               
   'Another thing I learned. There is another Stone preserved in           
 the land of Gondor that he has  not looked:n.  It is  at Erech.           
 Thither I will go....'                                                    
                                                                          
   And  lastly,  Aragorn  now introduces  the 'old  rhyme' in  these words:
 'Listen!  Here  is  an   old  rhyme-of-lore   among  my   kindred,  almost
 forgotten,  never  understood:  it  is  but  a  shard  of  the  rhymes  of
 Malbeth, the last Seer of our folk in the north' (see note 15).  The verse
 differs from  the form  in C  revised (p.  305) in  lines 2-4,  which here
 read:                                                                     
              It is darkling time, the shadow grows.                       
            Out of the Mountain he comes, his tryst keeping;               
              At the Stone of Erech his horn be blows.                    
   From  the  point  where  'Aragorn  sprang on  Hasufel' the  typescript M
 continues thus:                                                           
                                                                          
 ...  Then  Halbarad  lifted  a  great  horn,  and the  blast of  it echoed
 in  Helm's  Deep,  and  with  that  they  leapt  away,  riding   down  the
 Combe  like  thunder,  while  all  the  men  that  were  left  on  Dike or
 Burg stared in amaze.                                                     
                                                                          
   So now all roads were running together to  the East  to meet            
 the coming of war and  the onset  of the  Shadow. And  even as            
 Pippin stood at the Gate of the City and saw the Prince of Dol            
 Amroth ride in with his banners, the King  of Rohan  came down            
 out of the hills.                                                         
   Day was waning. In the last rays of the sun the  Riders cast            
 long pointed shadows that went on before them....                         
                                                                          
   The paragraph 'So now all roads were running together to the            
 East ...' had been written at the ends of texts B and C (pp. 300, 305),
 from which  it was  already clear  that my  father had  in mind  a chapter

 that should fall into two parts: first, the story of the return of Theoden
 and Aragorn to  the Hornburg  and Aragorn's  looking into  the palantir
 of  Orthanc, followed  by the  separate departures  of Theoden  and the
 Riders  and  of  Aragorn  and  the  Rangers; and  second, the  story of
 Theoden's  coming  to  Dunharrow.  The  paragraph  'So  now   all  roads
 were running  together to  the East'  was devised  as the  link between
 them (and provided the title of the  chapter in  the typescript,  which I
 have adopted here). In terms of RK, this  45th chapter  of The  Lord of
 the Rings consisted of 'The Passing of the Grey Company' (pp. 46  - 56)
 and  'The Muster  of Rohan'  (pp. 64  ff.); but  all account  of Aragorn
 and the Rangers after they had left the Hornburg  was to  be postponed.
                                                                       
    By  the  time  typescript  M was  made, much  further work  had been
 done on what it is convenient to call by the later title 'The Muster of
 Rohan',  extending  it  from  the  point  reached  in October  1944, as
 detailed  in  Chapter  II ('Book  Five Begun  and Abandoned').  I shall
 therefore postpone the  second part  of 'Many  Roads Lead  Eastward' to
 my next chapter; but the subsequent history of the first  or 'Hornburg'
 part may be briefly noticed here. The  typescript M,  retitled 'Dunhar-
 row', became the vehicle of  much of  the later  development (doubtless
 at different times) as far as the departure of Aragorn and  the Rangers
 from  the  Hornburg,  with  such  changes as  Parth Galen  for Calembel
 (and  a  proposed  name  Calembrith), Elladan  for Elboron,  the intro-
 duction  of  the  passage  (RK  p.  48) in  which Elrohir  and Halbarad
 deliver the messages from Elrond and Arwen  ('the Lady  of Rivendell'),
 and of Aragorn's  account (RK  p. 55)  of the  oathbreaking of  the Men
 of the Mountains and the words of Isildur  to their  king. Nonetheless,
 the verse of Malbeth did not at this stage reach the  alliterative form
 in RK:                                                                 
                                                                       
 '... Listen!  This is  the word  that the  sons of  Elrond bring  to me
 from their father in Rivendell, wisest in lore:                        
                                                                       
    '"Bid Aragorn remember the Paths of the Dead. For thus              
 spoke Malbeth the Seer:                                                
                                                                       
      When the land is dark where the kings sleep                       
      And long the Shadow in the East is grown,                         
      The oathbreakers their tryst shall keep,                          
    At  the  Stone  of  Erech shall  a horn  be blown:                  
      The forgotten people shall their oath fulfill.                    
      Who shall summon them, whose be the horn?                         
      For none may come there against their will.                       
      The heir of him to whom the oath was sworn;                   
      Out of the North shall he come, dark ways shall he tread;        
    He shall come to Erech by the Paths of the Dead." '                 

   At the stage represented by the further development of this typescript
 with  its  manuscript  additions  my  father  added  (as  the pagination
 shows), in a roughly written continuation that is  however close  to the
 form in RK, the story  of the  coming of  the Grey  Company (not  yet so
 called) to Dunharrow, and  the meeting  that night,  and again  next day
 at dawn, of Aragorn and Eowyn  (RK pp.  56 -  9).(18) It is clear  from the
 pagination that at this stage the muster in Harrowdale  was still  to be
 included  in this  chapter ('Dunharrow');  and that  the passage  of the
 Paths of the Dead was not yet told in this part of the narrative.       

                               NOTES.                                     
                                                                         
  1. A note in the margin of this text says 'Night of 3, day of  4th', i.e.
     they  came  to  the  Hornburg  at  dawn  of the  4th of  February. The
     chronology   envisaged   here  was   presumably  that   Theoden  would
     leave the Hornburg early on the 5th. See note 9.                     
  2. On  the  First  Map  'Dunharrow'   was  the   name  of   the  mountain
     afterwards  called  Starkhorn  (VII.319  and  p.  240  in  this book);
     the  distance  from  that  'Dunharrow'  to  the  spot  added  later to
     mark the position of the  Stone of  Erech (p.  268, footnote)  is 18.5
     mm or 92.5  miles. Precisely  the same,  though I  think that  this is
     by  chance  rather  than  design,  is  found  on  the   anomalous  map
     redrawn on p. 269  for the  distance from  Erech to  a little  mark in
     Harrowdale   that   probably   represents   Dunharrow.    The   Second
     Map  (p.  434)  gives  (probably)  45  miles;  and  this  is  also the
     distance  on  my  father's  large-scale  map  of  Rohan,   Gondor  and
     Mordor  (and  on  my  reproduction  of  it  published  in  The  Return
     of the King).                                                        
  3. A  wooden  ruler  that  may have  been the  one used  by my  father at
     this time gives 50 mm. = 62.5 miles.                                 
  4. Taum  Santoski  has  been  able  however to  read a  good deal  of it,
     especially in the latter part  of the  text where  the arrival  of the
     Rangers  is  described:  here  there  is  no  difference  of  any sig-
     nificance  between  the  original  draft and  the overwriting  in ink.
     Of  the  opening  passage of  the chapter  less can  be made  out; but
     it  can  be  seen  that  Aragorn,  in  answer  to   Legolas'  question
     'Where?'  ('And  then  whither?' in  RK) replied:  'I cannot  say yet.
     We  shall  go to  the Hold  of Dunharrow,  to Edoras  I guess  for the
     muster that the King  ordered in  [three >  ?four] nights'  time from
     now.  But  that  may  prove  too  tardy.'  He seems  not to  have said
     anything  equivalent  to  'An  hour  long  prepared  approaches';  and
     in answer to his question 'Who  will go  with me?'  it is  Merry alone
     who replies: 'I will. Though I  promised to  sit by  the King  when he
     gets  back  in  his  house  and  tell  him about  the Shire.'  To this
     Aragorn replies: 'That must wait, I fear - [?indeed]  I fear  it shall

                                                         
                                                                          
     prove one  of the  fair things  that will  not come  to flower  in this
     bitter spring.'                                                       
  5. For  earlier  applications  of  the  name  Halbarad  see  p.   236  and
     note 10.                                                              
                                                                          
  6. A  few  other  details  in  which  the  text  differs  from  RK  may be
     mentioned.  Aragorn's  reply  to  Merry's  remark  about   his  promise
     to  Theoden  remains  as it  was (note  4). In  the encounter  with the
     Rangers  Merry's  thoughts   are  not   reported;  Halbarad   does  not
     name   himself    Dunadan;   and    neither   Aragorn    nor   Halbarad
     dismount  at  first -  not until  the 'recognition'  do they  leap down
     from their horses.                                                    
  7. The brackets are in the original.                                      
                                                                          
  8. In  The  Tale of  Years (LR  Appendix B)  the entry  for the  year 1436
     in the  Shire Reckoning  states that  the King  Elessar, coming  to the
     Brandywine  Bridge,   gave  the   Star  of   the  Dunedain   to  Master
     Samwise.  In  my  note  33  to The  Disaster of  the Gladden  Fields in
     Unfinished Tales (pp. 284 - 5) I  said that  I was  unable to  say what
     this  was.  This  is  a  convenient  place  to  mention that  after the
     publication   of   Unfinished    Tales   two    correspondents,   Major
     Stephen  M.  Lott   and  Mrs.   Joy  Mercer,   independently  suggested
     to  me  that  the  Star  of  the  Dunedain was  very probably  the same
     as the silver brooch  shaped like  a rayed  star that  was worn  by the
     Rangers  in  the  present  passage  (RK  p.   51);  Mrs.   Mercer  also
     referred  to  the  star  worn  by  Aragorn  when  he served  in Gondor,
     as  described  in  Appendix  A  (I.iv,  The  Stewards):  'Thorongil men
     called him  in Gondor,  the Eagle  of the  Star, for  he was  swift and
     keen-eyed,  and  wore  a  silver  star upon  his cloak.'  These sugges-
     tions are clearly correct.                                            
  9. The chronology is now thus:                                           
       February   4   Theoden   and   Aragorn   reach   the    Hornburg   at
     dawn.   In   the   afternoon   Theoden   and   the  Riders   leave  for
     Dunharrow,   and   soon   after   Aragorn   and   the   Rangers   leave
     for Edoras.                                                           
            At  the  Hornburg  Eomer  says:  'On the  evening of  the second
     day   from   now   we   should   come   there   [to   Dunharrow].  That
     night the moon will rise full.'                                       
       February   6   Full   moon.   Theoden   arrives   at   Dunharrow   at
     dusk.                                                                 
 10. In a later text (see p.  397) the  black Stone  of Erech,  brought from
     Numenor,  was  not  a  palantir, but  a palantir  was preserved  in the
     Tower  of  Erech.  In  the   present  text   (and  in   the  subsequent
     revisions,  pp.  302,  304-5},  on  the  other  hand, the  most natural
     interpretation  of  the  words  seems  to  be that  the Stone  of Erech
     was itself the palantir. On the  sites of  the palantiri  as originally
     conceived  see pp.  76-7. -  Against Aragorn's  speech is  pencilled in
     the  margin:  'He  has not  forgotten the  sword of  Isildur. Doubtless

       he will think that I have got the treasure.' Cf. the subsequent text
       (p. 304): 'But now he will  hesitate, doubting  whether the  heir of
       Isildur hath that which Isildur took from him.'                     
  11.  I have  punctuated this  verse according  to the  subsequent version
       of it, which is almost identical. In the fourth line my father wrote
       over earth, changing earth to the world, and  I have  substituted on
       for  over,  as  in  the  following version.  - forwandred:  worn and
       weary from wandering.                                               
  12.  The  original  texts  of  the  abandoned opening  of 'The  Muster of
       Rohan'  began  'Day  was  (fading)  waning';  the   paragraph  cited
       ('So  now  all  roads  were  running  together  to  the  East  ...')
       precedes 'Day was waning' in RK.                                    
  13.  In the message that came to Rivendell the wording  in this  text is:
       The  Lord  Aragorn  has need  of his  kindred. Let  the last  of the
       Kings  of  Men  in  the North  ride to  him in  Rohan, where  RK has
       Let the Dunedain ... In a  rejected form  of this  passage preceding
       it in the  manuscript the  wording is:  Let all  that remain  of the
       [struck out: Tarkil] Kings of Men ride to him in Rohan.             
          Legolas' support for his opinion that it  was Galadriel  who sent
       the  message,  'Did she  not speak  through Gandalf  of the  ride of
       the  Grey  Company  from  the  North?', is  absent here.  The refer-
       ence  is  to 'The  White Rider'  (TT p.  106) and  Galadriel's verse
       addressed to Aragorn spoken to him by Gandalf in Fangorn:           
               Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth,           
               And the Grey Company ride from the North.                   
               But dark is the path appointed for thee:                    
               The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea.              
       It was at this stage in the evolution of the story  that Galadriel's
       message  in  verse  to  Aragorn  was  changed  from its  earlier and
       altogether different form: see VII.431, 448.                        
          When  the  three  companions  went  down  from  the  broken gates
       they 'passed the new mounds of the fallen raised  on the  Gore' ('on
       the  greensward',  RK  p.  50);  and  'the  Riders  were  assembling
       upon the Gore' ('on the green', RK  p. 51).  Cf. the  description of
       the  Hornburg  in  the  chapter  'Helm's Deep'  (TT p.  134): 'About
       the  feet  of  the  Hornrock  it  [the  Deeping  Stream]  wound, and
       flowed then in  a gully  through the  midst of  a wide  green gore';
       also the  drawing of  Helm's Deep  and the  Hornburg in  Pictures by
       j. R. R. Tolkien, no. 26.                                           
  14.  An  odd  detail  may  be  mentioned here.  In his  conversation with
       Legolas and Merry Gimli says in the C version, as first  written: 'I
       played  a  game  which  I  won  by  no  more than  one orc'  (cf. RK
       p. 49). This was now altered to: 'and  here Legolas  and I  played a
       game which I lost only by a single orc', and this survived  into the
       first  typescript.  But in  the second  completed manuscript  of 'The
       Road  to  Isengard',  written  long  before this  time, the  text is

                 
                                                                           
       precisely  as  in  TT,  p.  148: You  have passed  my score  by one,>
       answered Legolas.'                                                   
  15.  A rejected version of this form  of the  verse is  also found  in the
                                                                           
       manuscript: in this the first two lines read:                         
                   The Shadow falls; the kings are sleeping.                
                   It is darkling time, all lights are lou .                
       The remainder of the verse is  the same  as that  given in  the text.
       Although  Aragorn  describes  it  only  as  'an   old  rhyme   of  my
       kindred',  the  words  'Three  lords  I  see'  perhaps   suggest  the
       utterance of a seer; and Aragorn attributes it in the  following text
       (p. 306) to 'Malbeth, the last Seer of  our folk  in the  North' (cf.
       RK p. 54, where he declares that the wholly  different verse  that he
       recites in this place was spoken by  'Malbeth the  Seer, in  the days
       of Arvedui, last king at Fornost'). - In none of these texts is there
       any indication of what the 'tryst' might be. In the outline  given on
       pp.  274-5  there  is  mention  of  the defeat  of the  Haradwaith by
       'the-Shadow Host'.                                                   
  16.  The reason for calling the typescript 'M' is that as will be seen
       shortly it covers, in a single chapter (XLV), both the story of
       Aragorn at the Hornburg (preceded by texts A to C) and the story
       of the Muster of Rohan (preceded by texts A to L).
  17.  This was changed on the typescript to read: '"There go three that
       I love," he said, "and the halfling, Merry, most dearly.... and
       for them also we do battle, not only for the glory of Gondor. And
       yet fate divides us...." '
  18.  It is said in this continuation that Aragorn came to Edoras 'at
       dusk on the next day' (February 5), and that they did not halt
       there but passed up Harrowdale and came to Dunharrow 'late at
       night'; and Aragorn says to Eowyn on the following morning
       (February 6) that Theoden and Eomer will not return 'until the
       day is old'. See note 9.

                                      V.                                  
                                                                          
                        MANY ROADS LEAD EASTWARD (2).                      
                                                                          
 When  my  father  made  the  typescript  (M)  of  the  long  chapter  'Many
 Roads  Lead  Eastward'  he  had  not  only  written  a  good  deal  of what
 afterwards  became  'The  Passing  of  the  Grey  Company':  he   had  also
 greatly  extended  the  story  that  would  later  become  'The  Muster  of
 Rohan'  from  the  opening  abandoned  in  October  1944.  A  new  text  of
 the latter (following the last of the earlier ones,  that in  'midget type'
 which I have  called H,  p. 250)  takes up  at the  point where  Eomer says
 'Harrowdale at last!' (RK p. 65); this I will  call 'J'.  Tolerably clearly
 written in ink, it extends only as far  as Merry's  wonderment at  the line
 of standing stones across the Firienfeld (RK p. 68),  the last  lines being
 roughly pencilled, and then peters out into a brief outline; but so  far as
 it goes the first part  of 'The  Muster of  Rohan' in  RK was  now achieved
 almost  word  for  word, except  just at  the point  where it  breaks off.(1)
 The text ends thus:                                                       
                                                                          
  At   last   they  came   to  a   sharp  brink,   and  the   climbing  road
 passed  into  a  low  cutting  between   walls  of   rock  and   passed  up
 a  slope  out  onto  a  wide  upland.  The  Firienfeld  men  called  it,  a
 green   mountain   field  of   grass  and   heath  above   the  deep-delved
 valley,  on  the  lap  of  the  great   mountains  behind:   the  Starkhorn
 southward,    and    westward    [read    northward](2)  the    many-peaked
 mass   of    Iscamba (3) Irensaga    [written   above:    Ironsaw],   between
 which  lower,  but  steep   and  grim,   stood  the   black  wall   of  the
 Dwimorberg,   rising   out   of   thick   slopes   of   sombre  firs/pines.
 Towards  this  marched  from  the  very   brink  of   the  stairs   to  the
 dark  edge  of  the  wood  a  line   a  double   line  [sic]   of  standing
 stones.    Worn   and    black,   some    leaning,   some    fallen,   some
 cracked   or   broken,   they   were   like    old   teeth.    Where   they
 vanished  into  the  wood  there  was   a  dark   opening  into   a  cavern
 or  recess  in  the  [?western]  side. Just  within dimly  seen was  a tall
 standing pillar.                                                          
  Merry   looked   at   this   strange   line   of   stones   and   wondered
 what they could be. He                                                    
  Eowyn says Aragorn has gone by the Paths of the Dead.                    
  The huts and pavilions of the hold.                                      
  To the king's pavilion come the messengers of Gondor.                    
  The   king   promises  7   thousand  horse   to  ride   as  soon   as  may

                                  
                                                                          
 be. At same [time] messengers come from Eastemnet saying that              
 an orc-host has crossed the river, below the Limlight.                    
 It is a gloomy evening repast.                                           
 The morning is dull and overcast, and gets darker.                        
                                                                          
 On  this page,  which is  reproduced on  p. 314,  are two  rapid pencilled
 sketches  which  amply  illustrate  the   final  conception   of  Harrowdale
                                                                          
 and Dunharrow.
  It is to be  remembered that  at this  time the  further story  of Aragorn
 and  the  Grey  Company,  their  coming  to  Dunharrow and  their entering
 the  Gate  of  the Dead,  was not  present in  the narrative:  the present
 passage was to be  the first  account of  the Dwimorberg,  the Firienfeld,
 the line of standing  stones, the  Dimholt, and  the great  monolith before
 the Dark  Door.  When  afterwards  the  structure  of  the  narrative  was
 changed my father largely retained  this description  in the  chapter 'The
 Muster  of Rohan'  (RK pp.  67 -  8): he  treated the  coming of  the Grey
 Company  to  Dunharrow  two  nights  before  the arrival  of Theoden  in a
 single sentence  ('they passed  up the  valley, and  so came  to Dunharrow
 as darkness  fell', RK  p. 56),  and said  almost nothing  of the  scene -
 they  'sat at  supper' with  Eowyn, 'as  Aragorn came  to the  booth where
 he  was  to  lodge with  Legolas and  Gimli, and  his companions  had gone
 in, there came the Lady Eowyn after him and  called to  him', and  that is
 all.  The  approach  of  the  Company  to  the Dark  Door next  morning is
 described with a mysterious brevity:  the double  line of  standing stones
 across the Firienfeld is mentioned cursorily, as  if their  existence were
 already  known  to  the  reader:  'A  dread  fell  on  them, even  as they
 passed between the lines of  ancient stones  and so  came to  the Dimholt'
 (RK p. 59).                                                               
  The text J  was followed  by another,  'K', beginning  at the  same point
 ('Harrowdale at last!'); this was  clearly written  in ink  as far  as the
 point  where  Eowyn  says  to  Theoden:  'And  your  pavilion  is prepared
 for you, lord, for I have had full tidings of you' (cf. RK p. 68). In this
 text the description of the Firienfeld runs as  follows (the  passage here
 set between asterisks was rejected, but is not  marked in  any way  in the
 manuscript):                                                              
                                                                          
 The  Firienfeld  men  called  it,  a green  mountain-field of  grass and
 heath,   high   above   the   deep-delved  valley   [>  course   of  the
 Snowbourn],   on   the   Jap   of  the   great  mountains   behind:  the
 Starkhorn  southwards  to  the   right,  and   [westward  in   front  >]
 northward   to   the   left   the    many-peaked   mass    of   Irensaga
 Ironsaw,  between  which   there  faced   them,  darkly   frowning,  the
 grim  black  wall  of  Dwimorberg,  rising  out   of  thick   slopes  of
 sombre  pines.* [Towards  these   woods  o]   Across  the   wide  field
 there  marched,  from  the  brink  of  the  stair  to  the dark  edge of

 (Starkhorn, Dwimorberg and Irensaga.)

      
                                                                        
 the woods,  a  double  line   of  standing   stones,  worn   and  black.
 Some leaning,  some  fallen,  some  cracked   or  broken,   they  looked
 like rows  of  old  and  hungry  teeth.  Where  they  entered   the  wood
 there  was  a  [dark  opening  >]  way  in the  trees: just  within dimly
 to be  seen  was  a  tall  standing  pillar  and  beyond  it  the  dark
 opening  of  a  cavern  or   great  door.   Dividing  the   upland  into
 two  chere   marched   a   double   line   of   standing   stones   that
 dwindled  in  the  dusk  and   vanished  into   the  trees.   Those  who
 followed  that  road  came  to   a  dark   clearing  amid   the  sighing
 gloom  of  the  Firienholt,(4) and  there  like a  shadow stood  a single
 pillar  of  stone,  and  beyond  a  huge  doorway  in  the  side  of the
 black  cliff.  Signs  and  figures  were  set about  it that  none could
 read,  worn  by  the  years  and  shrouded  from  the  light.(5) In long
 memory none had dared to pass that door. Such was the dark            
 Dunharrow, the work of long-forgotten men....                           
                                                                        
 The text then  continues very  close indeed  to RK  (p. 68),  ending with
 Eowyn's words to  Theoden 'I  have had  full tidings  of you',  which do
 not stand  at the  foot of  a page.  The next  words, '"So  Aragorn has
 come," said Eomer' (RK p.  69), stand  at the  head of  a new  page, and
 there  follows  a manuscript  pencilled in  my father's  most impossible
 handwriting, effectively indecipherable except insofar as later versions
 provide clues - as is however largely the case  here. This  further text
 can be regarded as a continuation of K. It carries the narrative of 'The
 Muster  of  Rohan'  as  far as  the conclusion  of Theoden's  words with
 the errand-rider of Gondor, RK p. 73;  and while  it is  naturally rough
 and hasty in expression,  and would  be greatly  refined, the  story was
 effectively present from the  first. The  following passage,  however, I
 cite in full, following Eomer's words (cf. RK  p. 70)  'For the  road we
 have climbed  is the  approach to  the Door.  Yonder is  the Firienholt.
 But what lies beyond no man knows.'  For the  earliest reference  to the
 old man of Dunharrow see the notes ('E') given on p. 242.               
                                                                        
 'Only   legend   of   old   days   has   any   report  to   make,'  said
 Theoden.  'But  if  these  ancient tales  are to  be believed,  then the
 Door  [?in]  Dwimorberg  leads  to  a  secret   way  that   goes  under
 the  mountains.  But  none  have   dared  ever   to  explore   it  since
 Baldor  son  of  Bregu  dared  to   pass  the   Door,  and   came  never
 back.  Folk  say  that  Dead  Men  out  of  ...  Years  guard   the  way
 and  will  suffer  none  to  come to  their secret  halls. But  at whiles
 they   may   be   seen  [?rush)ing   out  like   shadows  and   down  the
 Stony  Road.  Then  the  men  of  Harrowdale   shut  fast   their  doors
 and  shroud  their   windows  and   are  afraid.   But  seldom   do  the
 Dead come forth, and only at times of great peril.'                     

   'Yet  it  is  said  in  Harrowdale,'  said  Eowyn  quietly,  'that they
 came forth in the moonless nights [? just past].'                        
   'But why has Aragorn gone that way?' said Merry.                       
   'Unless  he  has  spoken  to  you  his  friend,  then  you  have  heard
 as  much  as  we,'  said  Eowyn.  'But  I  thought  that  he  had changed
 much  since  I  saw  him  in  Meduseld.(6) Fey  he   seemed  to   me,  and
 as one that the Dead call.'                                              
   'Maybe,'  said  Theoden.  'Yet  my  heart  tells  me   that  he   is  a
 kingly  man  of  high  destiny.  And  take  comfort  in  this,  daughter,
 since  comfort  you  seem  to  need  in  your  grief  for   this  passing
 guest.  It  is  said  that  when  the  Eorlingas  came  first out  of the
 North   and   passed   up   the  Snowbourn   seeking  strong   places  of
 refuge  in  time  of  need,  that  Bregu  and  his  son   Baldor  climbed
 the  Stair  of  the  Hold  and [?passed]  to the  Door; and  there there
 sat  an  old  man   aged  beyond   count  of   years,  withered   as  old
 stone.  Very  like  to  the  Pukel-men  he  was  as   he  sat   upon  the
 threshold of the dark Door.                                              
   'Nothing  he  said  until  they  sought  to  pass  him  and  enter, and
 then  a voice  came out  of him  as if  it were  out of  a stone,  and to
 their amazement it spoke in their own tongue. The way is shut.           
   'Then   they   halted   and   looked   at  the   old  man   whom  [?the
 king]  had  at  first  taken  for  [??an  image]  such  as  stood  at the
 turnings  of  the  Stair.  But  he  did  not  look  at  them. The  way is
 shut  the  voice  said  again.  It  was  made  by  those  who  are Dead
 and (?? for j the Dead [??to] keep until the time comes.                 
   'And when will that be? said Baldor.                                  
   'But  no  answer  did  he  ever  get.  For  the  old  man died  in that
 hour  and  fell  upon   his  face,   and  no   other  [??words]   of  the
 ancient  dwellers  in  the  mountains  did  [?our]  folk ever  learn. Yet
 maybe the time has come and Aragorn will pass.'                          
   'And  whether  the  time  is   [?come]  or   no,'  said   Eomer,  'none
 can  discover  save  by  daring  the  door.  A  [?true]-hearted  man  was
 Aragorn,  and  still  against hope  I hope  to see  his face  once again.
 Yet  our  roads  lie'  And  then  he  paused,  for  there  was   a  noise
 without of men's voices and the challenges of the king's guard.          
                                                                         
   Then  Dunhere  entered  and  announced  the  coming  of  the  messenger
 (or  messengers)(7) of  Gondor.  In  his  opening words  Dirgon, as  he is
 called  here (Hirgon  in RK),  says: 'Often  you have  aided us,  but now
 the Lord Denethor begs for all your  strength, and  all your  speed, lest
 Gondor   fall.   Then   would  the   tide  sweep   over  the   fields  of
 Calenardon.'(8) From  Theoden's  words  'And  yet  he knows  that we  are a
 scattered people and take time to gather in our riders' the text runs far

  more briefly than in  RK to  the end  of his  speech with  the messenger.
  Dirgon  does  not  speak  again, and  Theoden refers  only, and  briefly, to
  the war  with  Saruman  and  the  lesser  number  of  Riders  that  he can
  send;  concluding  'Yet  all  is  more advanced  than I  hoped. We  may ride
  on the [?third] day from now.'
  A further  pencilled text  ('L'), as  fearsomely scrawled  as K  or worse,
  takes up after a  short gap  for which  there is  no drafting  with Merry's
  words, I will not be left behind to be called  for on  return (RK  p. 73).
  It is curious that this text is headed 'XLVI' (without title), whereas the
  typescript  M,  obviously  developed  from  L, includes  this story  of the
  departure  of  the  Riders  from  Harrowdale  as  the  conclusion  of  'XLV:
  Many  Roads  lead Eastward'.  I can  only suppose  that my  father briefly
  intended  to  begin  a  new  chapter  with  Merry's  words,   but  thought
  better of it.                                                            
    The opening of the text L is very close to RK pp. 73  - 5.  The darkness
  that has spread out of the East and reached  far into  the western  sky is
  described  in  the  same  words; the  first messenger  from Gondor  is now
  named  Hirgon,  and  the  second  (never  named)  is  present  -  but this
  latter says of the darkness only: 'It  comes from  Mordor, lord.  It began
  last night at sunset,  and now  the great  cloud lies  on all  the [?land]
  between  here  and  the  Mountains  of  Shadow,  and  it is  deepening. By
  the fire-signals war has already  begun.' To  this Theoden  replies: 'Then
  the die is cast. There  is no  longer need  or profit  in hiding.  We will
  muster  at  once  and  wait  not.  Those  who  are not  here must  be left
  behind or follow....'                                                     
    Merry's story  at this  point was  somewhat different  from its  form in
  RK. After his expostulation to Theoden  ('Then tie  me on  to one,  or let
  me hang on a stirrup ...') the text, hurled onto the paper, continues:
                                                                           
    Theoden   smiled.   'You    shall   ride    before   me    on   Snowmane
  [?rather  than  wander  in  the  plains]   of  Rohan.   Go  now   and  see
  what the armourers have prepared for you.'                                
    'It   was   the   only   request   that   Aragorn  made,'   said  Eowyn.
  'And it has been granted.'                                                
    With  that  she  led  him  from  the  pavilion  to   a  booth   at  some
  distance  among  the   lodgings  of   the  king's   guard,  and   there  a
  man  brought  out  to  her  a  small  helm  and  a  coat  of  mail  and  a
  shield  like  to  the  one  that  had  been  given  to  Gimli.(9) No  mail we
  had  to  fit  you  nor  time  to  forge  a  hauberk for  you,'(10) she said,
  'but  here  is  a  short jerkin  of leather  and a  shield and  a [?short]
  spear.   Take   them  and   bear  them   to  good   fortune.  But   now  I
  have  .......  to  look  to.  Farewell.  But  we   shall  meet   again,  my
  heart foretells, thou and I, Meriadoc.'                                   
    So  it  was  that  amid  the  gathering  gloom  the  King  of  the  Mark
  set out.  Not  many  hours  had   passed,  and   now  in   the  half-light

 beside  the  grey  rush  of  the  Snowbourn  he   sat  proudly   on  his
 white  horse,  and  five  [and]  fifty   hundreds  of   Riders,  besides
 men   .....   with   spare   horses   bearing   light   burdens,  [?were
 ranged].  They  [?were  to  ride  down]  to  Edoras  and  [?thence out
 and  away]  along  the  well-beaten  road   eastward,  pass   along  the
 skirts  of  the hill[s]  to [?Anorien]  and the  walls of  Minas Tirith.
 Merry  sat  on  his  pony  that  was  to  bear  him  down  the [?stony]
 valley,  and  after that  he was  to ride  with the  king or  some other
 of his company.                                                         
   A  trumpet  sang.  The  king   raised  his   hand,  and   without  any
 sound  of  voice,  silently,  without  shout  or  song,  the  great ride
 began.  The  king  passed  along  the  lines   followed  by   Merry  and
 Eomer  and   the  errand-riders   of  Gondor   and  Dunhere,   and  then
 his   guard  of   twelve  picked   spearmen.  To   Eowyn  he   had  said
 farewell above in the Hold.                                             
                                                                        
   It is  clear, from  Theoden's 'You  shall ride  before me  on Snowmane
 rather than  wander in  the plains  of Rohan.  Go now  and see  what the
 armourers  have  prepared for  you', and  from the  words 'Merry  sat on
 his pony that was to bear him down the stony valley,  and after  that he
 was to ride with the king or some other  of his  company', that  at this
 stage Merry was to go  with the  Rohirrim to  Minas Tirith  openly, with
 the  concurrence  of  Theoden,  and without  any assistance  from Eowyn.
 This does not  mean, of  course, that  Eowyn was  not present  among the
 Riders in disguise, although no covert reference is made to her  in this
 original  account  of  the  departure  from  Harrowdale; and  indeed her
 death  before Minas  Tirith had  been long  foreseen (see  VII.448; also
 the outline given on p. 256 and especially that on p. 275). In any case,
 a further draft for the story of the departure follows in text L:       
                                                                        
   First   there  went   twelve  of   the  king's   household-men  [?and]
 guard,  picked  spearmen.  Tall   and  stern   they  looked   to  Merry,
 and   one   among   them,  less   tall  and   broad  than   the  others,
 glanced  at  the  hobbit  as  he  passed,  and  Merry  caught  the glint
 of clear grey eyes.  He shivered  a little,  for it  seemed to  him that
 the  face  was  of  one  that   goes  knowingly   to  death.   The  king
 followed  with  Eomer  on  his  right  and  Dunhere  on  his   left.  He
 had  said  farewell  to  Eowyn  above  in   the  Hold.   Merry  followed
 with  the  errand-riders  of   Gondor  and   behind  went   twelve  more
 of  the  guard.  Then  in   [?ordered]  lines   the  companies   of  the
 riders   turned   and   rode   after   them   as  was   appointed.  They
 passed   down   the  road   beside  the   Snowbourn,  and   through  the
 hamlets   of   Upbourn   and   Underharrow   where   many    sad   faces
 looked  from  dark  doors.  And  so the  great ride  to the  East began,

 with which the songs of Rohan were busy for many lives of men              
 thereafter.                                                               
                                                                          
 Here  the   text  L   ends,  and   here  the   typescript  M   ends  also.
 In this  second  part  of  the  chapter  'Many  Roads  lead  Eastward' the
 typescript  text  shows  great  refinement  in  detail over  these exceedingly
 rough  and  obviously  primary  drafts, but  no texts  are found  to bridge
 them;  and it  seems possible  that the  developed form  in M  was actually
 achieved  on  the  typewriter  (there  are in  fact several  passages that
 could suggest this). To a great extent  the text  of RK  in 'The  Muster of
 Rohan'  was  now  present;  but  there  remained still  some differences,
 and among these I notice the following.(11)                               
   Eowyn now says of the  coming forth  of the  Dead (see  p. 316),  Yet it
 is said in Harrowdale that they came  forth again  in the  moonless nights
 but little while ago, a great  host in  strange array,  and none  saw them
 return, they  say.' The  old man  beside the  Dark Door  is still  said to
 resemble  one  of  the  Pukel-men.(12) On  the front  of Hirgon's  helm 'was
 wrought as an emblem a  small silver  crown' ('star'  in RK).  The second,
 unnamed  errand-rider  from  Gondor  says  here  of  the  darkness spread-
 ing  out  of  Mordor:  'From  my  station  by  the  beacon of  Minrimmon I
 saw it rise', where in RK he says: 'From the hills in the Eastfold of your
 realm  I  saw  it  rise'.  Notably,  the  conversation  between  Merry and
 Theoden now takes this form:                                              
                                                                          
   Theoden smiled. 'Rather than that I will bear  you with  me on          
 Snowmane,'  he  said.  'I  guessed your  words before  you spoke          
 them. But at the least you shall ride with me to Edoras and look          
 on Meduseld, for that way  I shall  go. So  far Stybba  can bear          
 you: the great race will not begin till we reach the plains.'             
   'And over the  plains with  you to  the end  of the  road your          
 squire will ride,' said Eowyn. 'That you know in your heart, and          
 others also have  foreseen it.  Come now,  Meriadoc, and  I will          
 show you the  gear that  is prepared  for you.  It was  the only          
 request  that  Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn  made  of  us  ere  he          
 departed.'                                                                
   With that she led  the hobbit  from the  king's pavilion  to a          
 booth among the lodges of the king's guard near by; and  there a          
 man  brought  out  to her  a small  helm and  a spear  and round          
 shield, and other gear.                                                   
                                                                          
   The  account  of  the departure  follows that  in text  L (p.  318); the
 Rider  who  looked  at  Merry  as  he  passed  is  still among  the twelve
 household-men  that  preceded  the  host,  'somewhat  less  in  height and
 girth  than  the  others';  and nothing  is said  of what  arrangement had
 been made for Merry after the departure of the host from Edoras.          

    The  chapter  'Many  Roads  Lead  Eastward'  ended,  both   in  manu-
  script and typescript,  at the  ride of  the Rohirrim  down Harrowdale:
  'And so  the great  ride to  the East  began, with  which the  songs of
  Rohan were busy for many lives of men thereafter' (p.  319; RK  p. 76).
  The conclusion of 'The Muster of Rohan' as  it stands  in RK  was added
  later, but not much later (at  least in  terms of  the progress  of the
  narrative: what halts and of what duration took place in the writing of
  Books V and VI there seems no way  of telling);  it first  appeared, in
  fact, as the opening of Chapter XLVII, 'The Ride of the  Rohirrim', and
  I postpone it to that place (p. 349).                                  

                            NOTES.                                     
                                                                      
 1. On  a  rejected  page  in  this  manuscript,  however,  Theoden  ex-
    presses  some  amazement  at  the  scene  in  Harrowdale:  'The king
    looked  with surprise  about him,  for there  was a  great concourse
    of  men ...  "What is  the meaning  of this?"  asked the  king. "Was
    not  the muster  set to  begin tomorrow  at Edoras?"  ' Then  a man,
    unnamed,  explains  how  this  is  due  to   Gandalf,  and   a  note
    follows: 'Gandalf must tell the king as  he rides  off that  he will
    order  the  muster  at  Dunharrow  and  speed   it  up.   That  will
    necessitate altering remarks about the full moon'  (see the  Note on
    Chronology  below).  This  rejected  page  then  concludes   with  a
    brief passage that depends on the  note: 'So  they saw  that Gandalf
    must  have  done  as  he  promised.  The  muster  was  here,  not at
    Edoras,  and  already  the  greater part  of the  men of  Rohan were
    assembled.'                                                        
      The words 'Gandalf must tell the king  as he  rides off'  can only
    refer  to  his  leaving  Dol  Baran  on  Shadowfax after  the Nazgul
    passed  over;  but no  such change  was in  fact introduced  in that
    place.                                                             
      At the  foot of  this rejected  page is  written: 'Eowyn  tells of
    Aragorn's  coming  and  his departure.  The Paths  of the  Dead. The
    road of Monoliths.'                                                
 2. westward was, I think, no more than a slip. It  was repeated  in the
    following text (p. 313) but corrected, probably at once.           
 3. Iscamba:  cf.  Old  English  camb   (Modern  English   comb),  comb,
    crest (as of a cock, a helmet, etc.).                              
 4. For  the  name  Firienholt  of  the  later  Dimholt  see p.  251 and
    note 21.                                                           
 5. For the origin of this sentence see p. 246. It reappears  in changed
    form  in 'The  Passing of  the Grey  Company' in  RK (p.  59), where
    the Company halted  before the  Dark Door:  'Signs and  figures were
    carved above its wide arch too dim to read, and fear flowed  from it
    like a grey vapour.'                                               

  6.  The first part of the name of the Golden Hall is so scrawled  that it
      could be read in almost any way, but it is  clearly not  Winseld, the
      earlier  name,  and  is  almost  certainly  the  first  occurrence of
      Meduseld.                                                            
  7.  Apparently there were  two messengers,  for while  the writing  is so
      fast that no detail of letter is entirely certain, my father seems to
      have   written  'Men   are  here,   errand-riders  out   of  Gondor.'
      Theoden's  reply  could be  equally well  read as  'Let him  come' or
      'Let  them  come'.  But  only one  man enters.  - The  war-arrow that
      he bears is green-feathered (black in RK).                           
  8.  The  name  Calenard(h)on  emerged  in  the  course  of   writing  the
      chapter 'Faramir': see pp. 155 - 6, with notes 18 and 22.           
  9.  The  reference  is  to  'The  King of  the Golden  Hall', TT  p. 127:
      '[Gimli] chose a cap of iron and  leather that  fitted well  upon his
      round head; and a small  shield he  also took.  It bore  the running
      horse,  white  upon  green,  that  was  the  emblem  of the  House of
      Eorl.'  This  passage,  in  which  is  recounted  also the  arming of
      Aragorn  and  Legolas  'in  shining mail',  was added  on a  rider to
      the fair copy manuscript of 'The King of the Golden Hall'.           
 10.  Thus the provision of a coat of mail  for Merry,  referred to  in the
      preceding sentence, was immediately denied.                          
 11.  The  following  names  and  name-forms  in  the  typescript   may  be
      mentioned.  The  Firienholt  remains,  for  later  Dimholt.  Brego is
      now  again  spelt  thus,  not  Bregu,  but  his  son's  name  is here
      Bealdor  (changed to  Baldor on  the typescript):  both of  these are
      Old  English  variants.  The  path  down  from  the  Dark  Door ('the
      road  of  Monoliths',  note  1)  is  again  called 'the  Stony Road',
      capitalised, as in the text K (p. 315). Hirgon  speaks of  the Harad,
      where RK has the Haradrim.                                           
 12.  In RK (p. 71) the old withered man is  said to  have been  once 'tall
      and  kingly'.  Cf.  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  Appendix  F  (Of Men):
      'The  Dunlendings  were  a  remnant  of  the  peoples that  had dwelt
      in  the  vales  of the  White Mountains  in ages  past. The  Dead Men
      of Dunharrow were of their kin.'                                     

                             Note on the Chronology.                          
                                                                             
 In  the last  of the  texts (H)  of the  abandoned opening  of 'The  Muster of
 Rohan'  Theoden  asked  if  the  moon  had   not  been   full  on   the  night
 before,  and  Eomer  replied  that  on  the  contrary the  moon would  be full
 that night (pp. 251 - 2, 272 - 3). In the first of the later texts  (J) Theoden
 himself  says  'Tonight the  moon will  be full,  and in  the morning  I shall
 ride  to  Edoras  to  the  gathering  of  Rohan',  and  this remained  into the
 typescript M.                                                                  
  In  'The  Road  to  Isengard'  the  date   of  the   muster  at   Edoras  was
 changed  over  and  over  again  according  to  the  shifting  chronology.  For

  the earliest texts see p.  27 and  note 6;  the second  fair copy  of that
  chapter  had 'before  the waning  of the  moon', changed  to 'at  the last
  quarter  of  the  moon'. This  was retained  in the  following typescript,
  but there changed subsequently to 'on the first day  after the  full moon'
  - which is the date in the present texts.  (In 'The  Road to  Isengard' in
  TT, p. 150, the date of the muster is to be 'the second day after the full
  moon', and so at the  beginning of  'The Muster  of Rohan'  in RK,  p. 65,
  Theoden  says:  'Last  night  the  moon  was  full, and  in the  morning I
  shall ride to Edoras to the gathering of the Mark.')                      
    In the note on text J (see note 1 above) it is  said that  'Gandalf must
  tell the king as he  rides off  [from Dol  Baran] that  he will  order the
  muster at  Dunharrow and  speed it  up', and  that this  'will necessitate
  altering remarks about the full  moon.' I  do not  understand this.  If my
  father was referring to the  passage in  'The Road  to Isengard'  in which
  the date of the muster is set, this would seem to  have no  relevance: for
  Gandalf  was  proposing,  in  view  of  the  coming  of  the   Nazgul,  to
  change  the  arrangement   that  had   been  made   and  'speed   up'  the
  muster.                                                                   
                                                                           
    All these later 'Muster of  Rohan' texts  agree that  the moon  was full
  on  the  night  that  Theoden  came  to   Harrowdale  (February   6);  cf.
  p.  299  and  note  9.  This  was  the  night following  the day  on which
  Gandalf and Pippin reached  Minas Tirith  at sunrise;  the sunset  of that
  day  was  'ominous',  and  the  Darkness  began  on  February 7  (p. 295).
  With  this  the  present  texts  agree:   the  second   errand-rider  from
  Gondor,  arriving  on  the  morning  of  the 7th,  says that  the Darkness
  'began last night at sunset'  (p. 317),  and the  departure of  the Riders
  from  Dunharrow  takes  place  in  deepening gloom.  It is  interesting to
  see that in text K,  as Merry  sat alone  in his  tent on  the Firienfeld,
  'Slowly  night  came on,  and the  half-seen heads  of the  mountains were
  crowned  with  small  stars  in  the  West,  but  the  East  was  dark and
  shadowy, and the  moon did  not appear  until late  at night';  whereas in
  the typescript M (where it was still the night of full  moon) the  moon is
  not  mentioned.  The  natural  presumption  is  that  the moon  was hidden
  by the vast cloud spreading out of Mordor.                                
    How  my father  was at  this stage  relating the  full moon  of February
  6 to Frodo's movements is not  clear to  me. In  The Tale  of Years  in LR
  the  full  moon  was  on  March  7  (since  Frodo  left  Henneth  Annun on
  March  8,  and  he  saw  the  full  moon  setting   before  dawn   on  the
  morning  of his  departure: 'The  Forbidden Pool',  TT pp.  292 -  3), and
  Theoden  came  to  Dunharrow  on  the evening  of March  9; but  with this
  the king's  words in  'The Muster  of Rohan',  RK p.  65, 'Last  night the
  moon  was  full',  do  not  accord,  and  should  have  been  'Two  nights
  ago'.  This  in  turn would  require alteration  of the  date set  for the
  muster in 'The Road to Isengard' (see above).                             

                                    VI.                                 
                                                                       
                           THE SIEGE OF GONDOR.                         
                                                                       
 My father's first start on this chapter was  a brief,  roughly pencilled
 text ('A') which he then wrote over in ink, so that a good deal  is lost,
 especially of the latter part  of it;  but Taum  Santoski has  managed to
 recover quite enough to show that the ink overwriting ('B')  followed it
 for the most part very closely. I shall here describe  B rather  than A,
 noting subsequently passages in which A is significantly different.
  Text  B  (numberless and  titleless) begins  as does  Chapter 4  in The
 Return of  the King  with 'Pippin  was roused  by Gandalf',  and extends
 through  the  paragraph  beginning  'It was  dark and  dim all  day' (RK
 p. 80). After Pippin's question 'Why did  you bring  me here?'  the text
 differs from that of RK:                                               
                                                                       
  'Because  it  was  not  safe  to  leave   you  behind,'   answered  the
 wizard. 'Safe  for others,  I mean.  It is  no safe  place here  for you
 or   anyone   else,   as   you'll  probably   soon  discover.   But  you
 brought it on yourself.' Pippin said no more.                          
  Before   long   he   was   walking   with   Gandalf  back   again  down
 the  long  cold  passage  to  the  doors  of  the  Tower   Hall.  Within
 Denethor  sat  in  a  grey  gloom,  like an  old patient  spider, Pippin
 thought,  and  looking  as  if  he  had  not  moved  since  he dismissed
 his  new  esquire  the  day  before.  He  beckoned  Gandalf  to  a seat,
 but  Pippin  was  left  standing  for  a  while unheeded.  Presently the
 old  man  turned  to  him  with  a  cold  smile,  whether of  mockery or
 welcome Pippin could not tell.                                         
  'And why have you come, Peregrin son of Paladin?' he said.            
  'I  was  told  that you  wanted me,  sir,' said  Pippin, 'to,  well, to
 learn my new duties.'                                                  
  'Ah  yes,'  said  Denethor.  'It  is  to  be   hoped  that   you  spent
 yesterday  well  and  to  your liking,  if less  in eating  [struck out:
 and  sleeping]  than  you  might  wish.  Today   you  shall   take  your
 turn  to  wait  on  me.  I  have  little more  now to  do, until  my son
 Faramir  returns  with  tidings.  And  if  there comes  no ill  news and
 the  great  ones'  (he  looked  at  Gandalf)  'do  not  occupy   all  my
 leisure, you shall talk to me. Can you sing?'                          
                                                                       
  Pippin's apologetic  account of  the songs  he knew  and his  horror at
 the  thought  of  singing  a  comic song  of the  Shire before  the grim

  Steward  of  Minas  Tirith  follows  as  in  RK,  as  does  Denethor's
  discussion with Gandalf,  the arming  and clothing  of Pippin,(1) and the
  darkness over the city, up to 'as if all the Vale of Anduin waited for a
  ruinous storm.' Then follows:                                           
                                                                         
    His duties he found irksome and dull, so  much so  that he            
  would even have welcomed a chance to sing  one of  his comic            
  songs. But he was not asked to sing, and indeed few spoke to            
  him at all.                                                             
                                                                         
    Here the overwritten text B ends. In the  underlying pencilled  text A
  the  discussion  between  Gandalf  and Denethor  did not  concern Rohan,
  but was on the subject of the immediate strategy: though very  little of
  it can be made out, the phrase 'Gandalf had already  been urging  on the
  Steward' and the name  'West Osgiliath'  can be  read. After  Pippin had
  returned from the armoury it is said that  he spent  the day  idly, 'for
  Denethor  sat  mostly  behind closed  doors'; and  at some  point during
  the day 'There was a clamour in the city.  Faramir had  returned. Pippin
  witnesses the greeting of Denethor and Faramir.'                        
    The pencilled and the overwritten texts end at the  same point  on the
  page, although in substance they had diverged.                          
    My father  evidently doubted  the rightness  of beginning  the chapter
  in this way, for at the head of the first page of this 'doubled' text he
  wrote in  pencil: '?  Begin with  Pippin and  Berethil (2) talking  again on
  wall on eve[ning] of 9th....' This was  in fact  overwritten by  part of
  the B text in ink, and as a result some further words of the note cannot
  be  read;  presumably  therefore  my father  had (but  only temporarily)
  abandoned the idea that the chapter might open differently.             
    At the end of the 'doubled' text the following  notes were  written in
  pencil:                                                                 
                                                                         
  ?  Sunset  -  a  gleam  far  off. Gandalf  says there  is hope  still in
  the West.                                                               
    Next  day  there  is  a  council  and  soon  Faramir  departs.  Pippin
  has  more  talk  with  Berethil  and  hears  that  Faramir  has  gone to
  Osgiliath.  Time   passes  slowly.   Ill  news   comes  on   11th  March
  (next  day)  that  there  is  a  Fell  Captain on  the enemy's  side. He
  has  won  the  Crossings  and  Faramir  is   driven  to   Ramas  Coren.(3)
  Still the darkness grows.  It is  like a  slow disease,  thought Pippin.
  Some  time  on  9th  Pippin  must  look  out  from  the  walls  and  see
  Nazgul  (6  or  7)  flying  over  Pelennor,  and see  them pursue  a few
  riders.  But  Gandalf  rides  out  -  and  saves  them.  It  is Faramir!
  Just  in  time.  Great  joy  in City.  Faramir sees  Pippin as  he comes
  up to the Citadel, and is astonished.                                   

  In these notes is the first appearance of the final calendar,  the month
  being  now  March instead  of February.  Whether it  entered at  this very
  time or somewhat earlier cannot  be said:  but the  last actual  date found
  in the texts is February 5-6 in the outline  for a  part of  'Many Roads
  Lead  Eastward'  given on  p. 296,  so that  the change  had at  any rate
  been made not long since.  The conception  of the  month 'lost'  in Lorien
  had  now  been  abandoned:  see  VII.367  -  9.  The relative  dates have
  however not  been changed:  in the  note suggesting  a different  way of
  opening the chapter Pippin and  Berethil are  to be  talking on  the wall
  of the  city 'on  the evening  of the  9th', which  would be  February 7
  according to the former dating (see the  Note on  Chronology at  the end
  of this chapter).                                                       
                                                                         
    My  father  now  returned  to  the  idea of  a different  opening, and
  began  a  new  draft  ('C')  in  which  the matter  of the  opening already
  written was omitted or compressed, and referred  to only  in retrospect.
  This draft was written in thick soft pencil, in ink over pencil, and in
  ink with pencilled corrections and clarifications,  and is  throughout a
  formidably difficult manuscript. I have no doubt  that it  all proceeded
  from the same time and impulse.                                         
    This new text is numbered 'XLVI',  without title;  it begins  with the
  words  'It  had  been  dark  all day;  from the  sunless dawn  until the
  evening the  heavy gloom  had deepened  ...', and  continues essentially
  as in RK pp. 80 - 1 as far as 'now he was  one small  soldier in  a city
  preparing for a great assault,  clad in  the grim  and sombre  manner of
  the Tower of Guard'; but there is no reference to the errand of Berethil
  (Beregond) across the Pelennor, nor to the last gleam of  the sun  as it
  escaped from the pall of cloud (see below). Then follows:               
                                                                         
  For   in   the   morning   Denethor   had   summoned  him,   and  bidden
  him  to  take  up  his duties  as the  lord's esquire;  and he  had been
  sent  straight  to  the  armouries  where   already  clothes   and  gear
  were made ready for him by Denethor's command.                          
    In  some  other  time  and  place  he  might  have  taken  pleasure in
  his  new  array,  but  he  knew  now  too  clearly   that  this   was  a
  deadly   serious  matter,   and  no   masquerade  in   borrowed  plumes.
  The   small   coat   of   black  mail   seemed  heavy   and  burdensome,
  and  the  helmet  with  its  wings  weighed  on  his  head.   Black  too
  was  the  tunic  or   surcoat  that   he  now   wore  above   his  mail,
  except  where  upon  the  breast  was  broidered  in  white  the  device
  of  the  Tree.  He  had  been  permitted  to  retain  the grey  cloak of
  Lorien  [added:  when  not  on  duty],  but  that  was  now  cast  aside
  on  the  seat beside  him, for  the air  was close.  He turned  his gaze
  away  from  the  darkling  plain  far  below,   and  yawned,   and  then
  he sighed.                                                              

    In  Pippin's  complaint  to  Berethil  and   their  words   about  the
  Darkness,  the  failure  of  Faramir  to  return  across  the  River and
  Gandalf's anxiety, and the sudden cry of the  Nazgul, the  draft reaches
  the text of RK  pp. 81-2  almost word  for word  (save only  that Pippin
  does not name the Prince of Dol Amroth as  present at  the deliberations
  with Denethor,  and he  says that  Gandalf left  the council  before the
  evening  meal,  where  RK has  'noon-meal'); but  when Pippin  climbs on
  to the seat and looks out there enters the description of the last gleam
  of  sun  that  shone  also  on  the  head  of  the  ruined  king  at the
  Cross-roads, omitted at its place in RK (on the synchronisation  see the
  note at the end of this chapter). Then again the draft reaches the final
  text in almost every turn of expression in the description of the Nazgul
  swooping  on the  horsemen, the  distant sound  of Faramir's  horn call,
  and  the radiance  of the  White Rider  racing towards  them, as  far as
  Pippin's wild shouting 'like an  onlooker at  a great  race urging  on a
  runner  who  is  far  beyond  encouragement.'  At  this point  my father
  stopped and set down a brief outline:                                   
                                                                         
    Gandalf  saves  Faramir.  Faramir  sees  Pippin  at  gate  of  Citadel
  and  wonders  -  Gandalf  introdures  them,   and  takes   Pippin  along
  to  Denethor's  council.  So  Pippin  hears  a  lot  and  hears  Faramir
  accept  orders  to  go  to  Osgiliath.   Denethor  and   Faramir  marvel
  at  Gandalf's  power  over  Nazgul.  Gandalf   says  things   are  still
  not  so  bad  -  because  the  W[izard]  King  has  not   yet  appeared.
  He  reveals  that  he  is  a  renegade  of  his  own order  ... [?from]
  Numenor.  'So  far  I  have  saved  myself  from  him  only by  flight -
  for  many  an age  he has  lain in  hiding or  sleep while  his master's
  power  waned.  But  now  he  is  grown  more  fell  than  ever.  Yet  it
  was  foretold  that  he  should  be  overthrown,  in  the  end,  by  one
  young and gallant. But maybe that lies far in the future.'              
    He   hears   about   Frodo   and   Sam.   Also  how   Faramir  crossed
  from  Tol  Varad  (the  Defended  Isle)  [>   Men  Falros]   with  three
  companions,  and  came  on  horse.  The  rest  of  the  'task  force' he
  had despatched to the Pelennor Gate.                                    
    Last  half  of  chapter  must  deal  with  situation  after  taking of
  Pelennor, the battle of Pelennor and the fall of the Gate.(4)             
                                                                         
    The  draft  continues  with  'And  now   the  swooping   dark  shadows
  were aware of the  newcomer' (RK  p. 83),  and again  the final  form is
  closely approached, if with  rougher and  less full  expression, through
  the coming of Faramir  with Gandalf  to the  Citadel, his  wonderment at
  seeing Pippin, and his story  told in  Denethor's private  chamber. Only
  Pippin's emotion when he first saw  Faramir was  at this  time different
  from the form in RK (pp. 83 - 4): the passage 'Here was one with  an air

  of high nobility such as Aragorn at times revealed ...' is  lacking (and
  remains absent in the following fair copy manuscript).                  
    From the point where  Faramir reached  the story  of his  meeting with
  Frodo and Sam I give the draft text in full, for though in many respects
  it closely approaches that  of RK  there are  also many  differences, and
  some are very noteworthy.                                                
                                                                         
    As  the  tale  of  his  meeting  with  Frodo  and  Sam  was  unfolded,
  pippin   became   aware   that   Gandalf's   hands  were   trembling  as
  they  clutched  the  carven  wood;  white  they   seemed  now   and  very
  old,  and  as  he  looked  at  them suddenly  with a  thrill of  fear he
  knew  that   Gandalf  -   Gandalf  himself   was  afraid,   mastering  a
  great  dread,  and  not  yet  daring  to  speak.  At  last  when Faramir
  told  how  he  had  parted  with  the  travellers  and  that  they  were
  resolved  to  take  the  road  to Kirith  Ungol his  voice fell,  and he
  shook   his   head   and   sighed.  But   Gandalf  sprang   up.  'Kirith
  Ungol  and   Morghul  Vale,'   he  cried.   'The  time,   Faramir.  When
  was  this,  do  you  say?  Tell  me,  tell  me. When  did you  part with
  them?   When   would   they   reach   the   Morghul   Vale?   When   did
  this  darkness  begin?  Do you  not see  - that  it may  be a  sign that
  all is indeed lost?'                                                    
    'I  spoke  with  them  yestermorn,'(5) said  Faramir.  'It  is  nigh on
  [20  >]  7  leagues   from  Henneth   Annun  to   the  road   that  runs
  from  M[inas  Morghul]  to  Osgiliath,  [and  from  the   nearest  point
  up that road west [sic] of our landing  place it  is 5  or 6  leagues to
  the  Vale  of  Dread  >]  and  if  they  went  straight  southward  then
  they  would  find  the road  some 5  or 6  leagues west  of the  Vale of
  Dread.  But  the  darkness  came   soon;  I   deem  [?under   cover]  of
  that  very  night,  long ere  they could  reach the  vale. Indeed  I see
  your  fear;  but  it  is clear  to me  that the  Enemy had  long planned
  this  war,  and  the  hour  was  already  determined  and  nought  to do
  with the errand of the travellers.'                                     
    Gandalf   paced   up   and   down.   'Yesterday   morn?'    he   said.
  'Then  you  have  been  swift.  How  far  hence   is  the   place  where
  you parted?'                                                            
    'Maybe  75  leagues (6) as  bird   flies,'  said   Faramir.  'But   I  am
  swift.  Yestereve  I  lay  at  Men  Falros,  the   isle  in   the  river
  northward  which  we  hold  in  defence,  and  on  the  hither  bank  we
  keep  horses.  As  the   darkness  drew   on  I   saw  that   haste  was
  needed.  So  I  rode  hither  with the  four men  that could  be horsed,
  and  sent  the  rest  of  my  company  to  strengthen  the guard  at the
  fords of Osgiliath. Have I done ill?'                                  
    'Ill!'  said  Denethor,  and  suddenly  his   eyes  blazed.   'Why  do

 you  ask?  Do  you  need  my  judgement?  Your  bearing is  lowly as
 is fitting, but it is long  since you  turned from  your own  way at
 my counsel. You  have spoken  skilfully and  discreetly, but  have I
 not  seen  your  eyes  fixed  on  Mithrandir,  seeking to  learn how
 much you should say? He has your heart in keeping.                 
   'My son, your father is old, but  he is  not yet  a dotard.  I can
 see  and  hear  as  was  my  wont,  and  not much  of what  you have
 left unsaid or half said is  now hidden.  I know  the answer  to the
 riddling  words  and  to  other  riddles  besides. Now  I understand
 the ...(7) of Boromir and his [?death].'                             
   'If you [are] angry, father,'  said Faramir,  'tell me  what other
 courses you would have had me take.'                               
   'You  have  done  as  I  should  have  expected,  for  I  know you
 well,'  said  Denethor.  'Ever  your  desire  is  to  be  lordly and
 generous  as a  king of  old -  gracious and  gentle. And  that well
 befits  men of  high lineage  who sit  in power  amid peace.  But in
 these black hours gentleness may be bought with death.'            
   'So be it,' said Faramir.                                        
   'So  be  it,'  said  Denethor; 'but  not by  your death  only. The
 death also of your father and  of all  your people  whom it  will be
 your  part  to  rule  ere  long  -  now  Boromir  is  no  more.'  He
 paused, clutching his [?wand].                                     
   'Do  you  wish  then,'  said  Faramir, 'that  our places  had been
 exchanged?'                                                        
   'Yes, I wish that  indeed,' said  Denethor. 'Or  no,' and  then he
 shook  his  head; and  rising suddenly  laid his  hand on  his son's
 shoulder. 'Do  not judge  me harshly,  my son,'  he said,  'or think
 that I am harsh.  Love is  not blind.  I knew  your brother  also. I
 would wish only that he had been in your  place, if  I were  sure of
 one thing.'                                                        
   'And what is that, my father?'                                   
   'That  he  was  as  strong in  heart as  you, and  as trustworthy,
 That  taking this  thing he  had brought  it to  me, and  not fallen
 under  thraldom.  For   Faramir,  and   you  Mithrandir,   amid  all
 your far flung policies, there is another way that is not  yours nor
 Boromir's. It is one thing to take  and wield  this power  for one's
 own  victory  -  you,  Mithrandir,  may  think  what  you   will  of
 me - '                                                             
   'What I think of you  is at  least one  part of  my mind  that you
 do not seem to have read,' said Gandalf.                           
   'As you will,  but I  have in  this as  much wisdom  as yourself,'
 said  Denethor. 'I  would not  use it.  On the  other hand,  at this

                                                                          
                                                                          
 hour  to  send  the  bearer,  and  such  a  one,  helpless   into  Mordor
 itself,  or  as  my  son  to  let  him  go  with  that  burden  to  Kirith
 Ungol, that also seems to me folly patent.'                               
   'What then is wisdom?' said Gandalf.                                    
   'To  do  neither,'  answered  Denethor.  'Certainly  not  to  risk  the
 maker  recovering  it  to  our  final  ruin.  To keep  it -  hidden, deep
 hidden,  yet  not  used  -  hidden  beyond  his   grasp  until   at  last
 [?either]  he  wins  all  by  war  and  we  are  dead.(8) Would that  I had
 that  thing  now:  in  the  deep  chambers  of  this  citadel,   and  then
 we should not shake with dread ...'                                       
                                                                          
   The  remainder  of  the  conversation  between  Gandalf   and  Denethor
 reaches effectively the form in  RK, p.  87 (but  Gandalf says:  'had you
 taken this thing by force or daunting  you would  not have  escaped'; 'if
 you had  received this  thing, it  would have  overthrown you',  RK). The
 episode ends thus in the draft:                                           
                                                                          
   He   turned   to   Faramir.   'What   news   from   the   garrison   at
 Osgiliath? '                                                              
   'I  have  sent  the  company  from  Ithilien  to  strengthen  it,  as I
 said,'  replied  Faramir.  'It  will be  there, I  think, that  the first
 assault will fall.'                                                       
   He  rose,  and  suddenly  he   swayed  and   leant  upon   his  father.
 'You  are  weary,  my  son,'   said  Denethor.   'You  have   not  spoken
 of your ride from Men Falros - and the dreadful wings.'                   
   'I do not wish to,' said Faramir.                                       
   'Then  do  not  so,'  said  Denethor.  'Go  now  to  sleep,  and  think
 that  such  things  shall  not  come  here  within  shot  of  our  bows -
 not this night at least. Tomorrow will need new counsels.'                
                                                                          
   Gandalf's talk with Pippin after they returned to  their lodging  as it
 stands in RK (pp. 88 - 9) was closely approached here,(9) and I  cite only
 one brief passage:                                                        
                                                                          
 '...  But  in  truth  I  believe that  the news  that Faramir  brings has
 more hope in  it than  seemed at  first. For  if Frodo  was still  so far
 away   yestermorn,   then   that   which   I    hoped   might    be   has
 probably   happened.   The   Enemy   has  made   war  in   haste  without
 the Ring  and  thinking  that  it is  with us.  And even  if all  goes as
 plans,  and  it  will not  if I  can prevent  it, he  will have  his eyes
 many  places,  far  from  his  own  land.  There  is  a  gleam   of  hope
 there.  So  I  told  Aragorn  when  we  rode  to  Rohan.(10) But  still,  I
 did not  expect  it  so  soon.  Something  else  has  happened   to  stir
 him.'                                                                   

    The  draft  text  now  races  towards  its  more  and  more  illegible
  conclusion.  Some  passages  were  added  in ink,  and these  I include,
  marking  them  as  such,  since  they  clearly belong  to much  the same
  time.  The  last  section opens  with 'The  next day  came like  a brown
  dusk' (RK p. 89), and continues very much as in the final text as far as
  the  departure  of  Faramir  to  Osgiliath  and  the  mutterings against
  Denethor.                                                               
                                                                         
    'The  Lord  drives  his  son  too  hard,  and  now  he  must  do  duty
  for  the  one  that  is  dead  as  well.'  [Added in  ink: But  in truth
  Faramir  went  at  his  own  will,  and  he  it  was  that  most  swayed
  the  council  of   the  captains.](11) The  council   of  the   Lord  had
  decided  that  with  the  threat  in  the  South  their  force  was  too
  weak  to  make  any  stroke  of  war  on  their  own  part.   They  must
  man  the  defences   and  wait.   Yet  ever   Faramir  had   urged  that
  their  outer  defences  must  not  be  abandoned,  and  the   River  was
  the  one  that  the  Enemy  should  buy  most  dearly.  It could  not be
  crossed  by  a  great  host  north   of  Men   Falros  because   of  the
  marshes,   and   away   south   in   Lebennin   it   became   too  broad
  without   many  boats.   So  now   he  was   gone  again,   taking  such
  few  men  as  Denethor  would  spare  to   strengthen  the   force  that
  held  the  western  ruins  of Osgiliath.  [Added in  ink: 'But  hold not
  too  long  so  far  afield,'  said  Denethor  as  he  went  out. 'Though
  you  slay  ten  times  your  number  at  the  crossing,  the  Enemy  has
  more  to  spare.  And  your  retreat  will  be  hazardous.  And  do  not
  forget  that  ...  danger  in  the  North.  Not  one  army only  will be
  sent at this time from the Black Gate.']                                
    Hardly  had  he  gone  when  a   rider  came   in  reporting   that  a
  host   was   approaching   and   ...   had   reached   East   Osgiliath.
  [Added  in  ink:  and  a  Black  Captain of  great terror  [?came] there
  out  of  Minas  Morghul.]   Wirh  that   ominous  news   ended  Pippin's
  third day in the Tower.                                                 
    The   next   day   the   darkness,   though   perhaps   little   more,
  weighed  yet  heavier  on  men's  minds,  and  it  seemed   that  slowly
  fear  grew.  Late  in  the  day  evil  news was  brought by  riders. The
  passage  of  the  Anduin  had  been  won.  Faramir  was   retreating  to
  the  Pelennor  Wall  and  the  fort[s]  that  guarded  the  entrance  of
  the  causeway  into  the  townlands;   but  he   could  not   hold  them
  long.  He  was  much  outnumbered  and   had  4   leagues  or   more  of
  open  land  to  cross  with  few  defences  when   he  must   give  back
  again.                                                                  
    'Mithrandir's   help   fails   now,'  said   some.  For   Gandalf  had
  ridden  down   to  Osgiliath   at  Faramir's side.(12) But others  said

                
                                                                   
 'Nay, he has never given  any, not  of such  a kind.  He is  not a
 captain of war.'                                                   
   But late that night he returned riding with the last wains filled
 with  wounded  men.  'They  have  paid  dearly  for  the causeway,'
 he said, 'although  they had  prepared all  things well.  They have
 been building barges and boats  secretly in  East Osgiliath  to the
 ruin of Ithilien's trees.  But the  river is  now half  choked with
 them.  But  he  has  come  whom  I  feared.'  'Not the  Dark Lord,'
 cried  Pippin,  'No,  he  will  not come  except in  triumph,' said
 Gandalf. 'He  wields others  as his  weapons. I  speak of  one whom
 you have  met. The  Wizard King,  captain of  those you  called the
 Black Riders.  Most fell  of all  the servants  of the  Dark Tower.
 But he has not [struck out (?):  yet] taken  to winged  steeds. [In
 him  I  am  not overmatched,  and yet  still I  am matched,  for he
 was  a  member  of  our  order  before  evil  took  him.](13) Now his
 fury and malice  are grown  to the  full, and  men fly  before him.
 [Written in ink at the head of the  page: But  the Wizard  King has
 not shown  himself. He  wields far  behind a  great fear  that will
 drive his soldiers whither he  will, even  to cast  themselves into
 the River  thar others  [?can] walk  on their  bodies. But  he will
 come forth yet.]'                                                  
   So the storm broke at last.                                      
   The next day  the causeway  fort[s] 'fell  and Faramir  began his
 desperate  retreat  across  the  Pelennor,  [in  ink,  replacing  a
 passage  in  pencil:  the  enemy  pouring  through the  wall behind
 and  sweeping  away  the ...  rearguard. Fires  glowing red  in the
 mist could be seen far off, and once  and again  [a] red  flash and
 then  slowly  a  dull   rumble  would   come  rolling   across  the
 darkened  fields.  The ...  were destroying  the wall  and blasting
 great breaches in it so that they  could enter  at any  point. Soon
 the  tide of  war [?would  cross]. The  companies of  Gondor could
 be seen  [?hastening] back.  And with  that out  of the](14) And now
 the  Nazgul [?stooped  again] and  the retreat  became a  rout, and
 [?many]  men  threw  away  spear  and  shield  and  sword  and  ran
 shrieking, or flung themselves to the ground and were trampled.
   Then there was a sortie from the city  led by  the Prince  of Dol
 Amroth  kinsman  of  Faramir  and  his  folk,  and  Gandalf  at his
 side.  In  the  [?notch]  of time  they came  up, and  [?two] miles
 from  the city  drove back  the enemy,  making great  slaughter, for
 the enemy  cavalry  were  [?few]  and  [?little]  ...;  the  Nazgul
 [?would (not) stand] the  onslaught of  Gandalf, for  their Captain
 was not with them.                                                 

   So now the City prepared for a last siege. The Pelennor wall            
 was abandoned, and all that could  be [?withdrawn]  behind the            
 gates.  Orcs  and  [?wild  horsemen]  roam[ed]  the  townlands            
 lighting the black night with  fires, and  the more  bold rode            
 within earshot of watchers on the  walls, crying  with hideous            
 voices, and many bore upon their spears the heads of  men they            
 had slain and hewn.                                                       
                                                                          
   Here  the  draft  C  ends.  It was  followed by  a fair  copy manuscript
 ('D'), in which the text of RK was very  largely achieved:  but it  took a
 great deal of further work to  reach it.  This manuscript  can be  seen as
 divided  roughly  between  the  part  that was  based on  C, and  the part
 that  extended  beyond  the point  where C  ended. Like  the draft,  it is
 numbered  'XLVI',  but has  no title;  and the  chapter again  begins with
 the words 'It had been dark all day.'                                     
   In the first part it is notable that while my father went to great pains
 with the detail of expression, and clearly  intended it  to stand,  in all
 those  passages  in  which  Denethor showed  himself less  coldly obdurate
 and  hostile  to Faramir  than he  became in  The Return  of the  King the
 original  draft  was followed  closely. His  sudden softening  in response
 to  Faramir's  question  'Do  you  wish  then  that  our  places  had been
 exchanged?' (p. 328) remains:                                             
                                                                          
   'Yes,  I  wish  that  indeed,'  said  Denethor.  'Or  no.'  And  then he
 shook  his  head,  and  rising  swiftly   he  laid   his  hand   upon  his
 son's  bowed  head.  'Do  not  judge   me  harshly,   my  son,'   he  said
 quietly,   'or   believe  me   more  harsh   than  I   am.  I   knew  your
 brother  well  also.  Love  is  not  blind.  I  could  wish  that  Boromir
 had  been  at  Henneth  Annun  when  this  thing   came  there,   only  if
 I were sure of one thing.'                                                
   'Sure of what, my father?'                                              
   'That  he  was  as  strong  in  heart  and  selfless  as  you,  my  son.
 That   taking   this   thing   he   would   have   brought  it   here  and
 surrendered  it,  and  not  fallen  swiftly   under  its   thraldom.  For,
 Faramir   -   and   you  too,   Mithrandir,  amid   all  your   wide  webs
 and  policies  -  there  is  a  third way,  that is  neither the  folly of
 wizards nor the lust of warriors....'                                     
                                                                          
   It is certain that there was no  element of  embittered banter  in these
 words,  That  he  was  as strong  in heart  and selfless  as you,  my son.
 Denethor  was  coldly  watchful as  always of  those he  spoke to,  but he
 expressed  the  true  bearing  of  his  mind.  His  gentler  good-night to
 Faramir,  with  a  suggestion  of  a  comforting  word (p.  329), remains;
 and  in  this  brief  passage  it  can  be  seen how  Denethor's harshness
 towards  Faramir  was  enforced  in  later  revision  by the  slightest of

 touches:  as  in the  movement from  'You are  weary, my  son' to  'You are
 weary, I see.'
 Again, in the debate on the following day (p. 330), it is  still Faramir
 who argues that an attempt must  be made  to hold  the outer  defences at
 the, line of the Anduin (but so far does the new  writing go  towards the
 actual  words  of  RK  (pp.  89 -  90) that  when my  father came  to revise
 passage  he  had  little  more  to  do  than  to  give  the  speeches to
 rent  speakers).  In  this  version  the speech  made by  Prince Imrahil
 (RK  p.  90),  warning of  another host  that may  come from  Mordor, is
 given to Gandalf, and it  is Faramir  who is  adamant and  concludes the
 debate with words that afterwards became his father's:                  
                                                                       
     'Much  must  be  risked  in  war,'  said  Faramir.  'But I  will not
 yield the  River  and  the  fields  of  Pelennor  unfought,   unless  my
 father commands me beyond denial.'                                     
     'I  do  not,'  said  Denethor.  'Farewell,  and  may  your judgement
 prove just: at least so much that I may sec you again. Farewell!'       
                                                                       
     When he rejected this account of  what happened  at that  meeting of
 the council my father wrote in  the margin  of the  page: 'This  must be
 altered to make Faramir only  go to  please his  father against  his own
 counsel  and  to  "take Boromir's  place".' And  on a  slip of  paper he
 wrote  a  brief statement  of how,  and why,  the existing  portrayal of
 Denethor's relations with Faramir must be changed:                     
                                                                       
    The  early  conversation  of  Faramir  and  his  father  and  motives
 must  be  altered.  Denethor  must  be  harsh.  He   must  say   he  did
 wish  Boromir  had  been  at  Henneth  Annun  -   for  he   would  have
 been  loyal  to  his  father  and  brought  him  the Ring.  (Gandalf may
 correct  this.)  Faramir  grieved  but  patient.  Then  Denethor must
 be all  for  holding  Osgiliath  'like   Boromir  did',   while  Faramir
 (and  Gandalf?)   are   against  it,   using  the   arguments  previously
 given  to   Denethor.  At   length  in   submission,  but   proudly,  to
 please  his  father  and  show  him   that  not   only  Boromir   was  brave
 [he]  accepts  the  command  at  Osgiliath.  Men  in  the  City  do  not
 like it.                                                               
     This  will  not  only  be  truer  to  previous  situation,  but will
 explain   Denethor's   breaking   up  when   Faramir  is   brought  back
 dying, as it seems.                                                       
                                                                       
  The first part of this passage was struck through, as far as 'Faramir
  grieved but patient', and the second part allowed to stand; but this
  was then rejected also. Finally the whole was marked with a tick,
  when my father at length decided that this was how it should in fact
  be.
                                                                       
    Also on this slip is a note written independently: Something should

  be  said  between  Gandalf  and  Pippin  about  the  scene  between Faramir
  and his father', but this suggestion was not taken up.                     
    Not  only  in  these passages,  but in  almost all  the points  where the
  draft C differed from RK, the manuscript D,  as my  father first  wrote it,
  retained  his  first conceptions.(15) When (in relation to  further progress
  in the  narrative) the  very substantial  alterations to  this part  of the
  chapter in D were carried out  I cannot  say for  certain. After  this, the
  text as it stands in RK was present in all essentials; but at this stage my
  father was still uncertain whether or  not to  adopt the  'longer opening',
  as  he  called  it,  in  which  the  chapter  opens  with  Gandalf's waking
  Pippin in their lodging (see pp. 324 - 5).(16)                             
                                                                            
    Drafting  for  the  latter part  of the  chapter is  not as  coherent and
  continuous as it is for the former.  My impression  is that  having written
  the fair copy manuscript D on the basis of the draft C so  far as  it went,
  or so far  as it  usefully went,  my father  then simply  went on  with it,
  writing  sections  of  draft  pari passu  with progress  on the  fair copy,
  which was itself  in places  the primary  composition. There  is no  way of
  knowing over how long a period all this work was spread.                   
    The  last part  of C,  from 'The  next day  the darkness,  though perhaps
  little  more,  weighed  yet  heavier on  men's minds'  (p. 330),  where the
  draft  text  became  very  cursory and  rushed, was  developed to  the form
  in  RK  (pp. 91  ff.): Gandalf  does not  now ride  down to  Osgiliath with
  Faramir,  and  the  account  of  the barge-building  in East  Osgiliath and
  the fear of the Black Captain is given by the messenger; it is only at this
  news  that  Gandalf  leaves  the  'City,  returning  at mid-morning  on the
  next  day  with  the  wains  bearing  the  wounded,  and there  follows his
  conversation  with  Denethor  (RK  pp.  91  -  3),  here  set  'in  a  high
  chamber near  the summit  of the  White Tower'.  In this  all is  almost as
  in  the  final  form;  but  Denethor, revealing  the mail  in which  he was
  clad beneath his long cloak, says nothing of  it (he  does not  reveal that
  he wears it night and  day), and  Gandalf still  as in  the draft  (p. 331)
  reminds  Pippin  who  the  Black Captain  is: 'You  have met  him, Peregrin
  son of Paladin, though  then he  was far  from home,  veiled to  your eyes,
  when  he  stalked  the Ringbearer.  Now he  is come  forth in  power again,
  growing   as  his   Master  grows.'   Gandalf  now   names  him   'King  of
  Angmar long ago', and this  is the  first appearance  of the  conception of
  the  Kingdom  of  Angmar  in  the  texts  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings. To
  Denethor's  'Or  can  it  be  that  you  have  withdrawn  because  you  are
  overmastered?'  (causing  Pippin  to  fear  that  'Gandalf  would  be stung
  to  sudden  wrath')  the  wizard  answers 'lightly'  ('softly' in  RK); and
  after 'But our trial of strength  is not  come yet'  he recalls  a prophecy
  concerning the fate of the Lord of the  Nazgul different  from that  in the
  brief outline given on p. 326:                                             
                                                                            
  '... And if words spoken of old come true, he is not doomed to             

 fall before warrior or wise [> men of war or wisdom]; but in the          
 hour of his victory to be overthrown by one  who has  never slain          
 a man [> by one who has slain no living thing]....'                       
                                                                          
 In RK this becomes: 'not by the  hand of  man shall  he fall,  and hidden
 from the Wise is  the doom  that awaits  him' (cf.  RK p.  116). At  the end
 of  this  conversation  Denethor  says: 'Some  have unjustly  accused you,
 Mithrandir, of delighting to bear  ill news';  before 'unjustly'  my father
 pencilled  'no  doubt',  but   afterwards  removed   both  qualifications.
  For all  the  story  of  the  sortie for  the rescue  of Faramir  and the
 out-companies  and  the  mounting  of  the  siege  there   is  preliminary
 drafting,  in  which  almost  all  features  of  the  final  narrative  were
 already present.(17) In the fair  copy  there  is  a  remarkable  addition
 pencilled in to the description of the  Nazgul circling  over the  City on
 the first day of the siege:                                                 
                                                                          
 The  Nazgul  came  once   more,  slaves   of  the   Nine  Rings,   and  to
 each,  since  now  they  were  utterly  subject  to  his will,  their Lord
 had given again that ring of power that he had used of old.               
                                                                          
 This  survived  into  the  first  typescript,  where  it   was  afterwards
 replaced  by  the  words  in RK  (p. 97):  The Nazgul  came again,  and as
 keir  Dark Lord  now grew  and put  forth his  strength, so  their voices,
 which uttered only  his will  and his  malice, were  filled with  evil and
 horror.'                                                                
                                                                          
 In initial drafting for the last part of the chapter the central  story of
 Denethor's  madness  can  be  seen  emerging as  my father  wrote (torren-
 tially, with scarcely-formed letters).                                     
                                                                          
   And Faramir lay in his chamber wandering in fever, dying as
 it was said, while his father sat beside him and heeded little the
 ending of the defence. It seemed to Pippin, who often watched
 by his side or at the door, that at last something had snapped in
 the proud will of Denethor: whether grief at the harsh words he
 spoke before Faramir rode out,(18) or the bitter thought that
 whatever now should happen in the war, his line too was
 ending, and even the House of the Stewards would fail, and a
 lesser house rule the last remnant of the kings of men.
   So it was that without word spoken or any commission from
 the Lord, Gandalf took command of the defence. Wherever he
 came men's hearts were lifted and the winged shadows passed
 from memory. Tirelessly he went from Citadel to the Gate, from
 north to south about the wall, and yet - when he had gone the
 shadow seemed to close on men again, and vain it seemed to
 resist, to wait there for cold sword or cruel hunger [sic].              

   And  so  they  passed  out  of  a  dim  day  of fear  to the  shadow of
 desperate  night.  Fire  now  raged  in  the lowest  circle of  the City.
 The  garrison  on  the  walls  was   well  nigh   cut  off,   those  that
 indeed  had  not  already  fled.  And  then  in  the  middle   night  the
 assault was loosed.                                                      
   [Messengers   came   to  the   high  tower   and  Denethor   looked  at
 them.  'The  [?outer]  circle  is  burning,  lord,'  they said,  'men are
 flying  from  the  walls.'  'Why?'  said  Denethor. 'It  is well  to burn
 soon  than  late.  I  will  go  now  to my  own pyre.  Farewell, Peregrin
 son  of Paladin,  your service  has been  short. I  release you  from it,
 unless  you  would  still  use  your sword  in defence  of what  is lost.
 Go now if you will to him that brought you here, to your death.'         
   He   rose  and   bidding  men   take  up   Faramir's  bed   and  follow
 him  left  the  White  Tower  and  paced  slowly,  pausing  only   for  a
 moment  at  the  ...  tree,  passed  out  of   the  Citadel,   and  going
 laid   himself   in   the   house   of   tombs   under   the   shadow  of
 Mindolluin with Pippin by his side.]                                     
                                                                         
   This passage that I have enclosed  in square  brackets was  an addition
 to the manuscript, but it can be  seen clearly  from the  manuscript that
 my father inserted it while he  was actually  writing the  description of
 the  black  horseman  and  the  destruction  of  the  Gate. A  later note
 scribbled against the passage reads: 'Pippin follows the cortege until it
 enters  the  tombs  and  then  flies  down  in  search of  Gandalf. Meets
 Berithil and together they go through the city. Pippin arrives in time to
 see Gandalf and the Sorcerer King.'                                      
                                                                         
   The   vanguard   passed   over   narrow   ways  between   the  trenches
 and  suffered  loss  where  they  bunched,  but  too  few   archers  left
 on  the  walls.  [?Front  of  war]  not  in  the  north  or south,  but a
 great   weight   came   to  the   gate.  The   ground  was   choked  with
 bodies but still they came on.                                           
   There  Gandalf  stood.  And  then  over the  hill in  the flare  of the
 fire  a  great  Black  Horseman  came.  For  a   moment  he   ...  halted
 menacing,  and  lifted  up  a  great  ...  sword  red  to the  hilt. Fear
 fell  on  all  .......  Then  great rams  went on  before, but  the steel
 only   shook   and  boomed.   The  Black   Captain  .....   lifted  again
 his  hand crying  in  a  dreadful  voice.  In  some  forgotten  tongue he
 spoke  crying  aloud  words  of  power  and   terror.  Thrice   the  rams
 boomed.   Thrice   he   cried,  and   then  suddenly   the  gate   as  if
 stricken  by  some  blast  burst  [?asunder],  and  a  great flash  as of
 lightning,  burst  and  fell, and  in rode  the Lord  of the  Nazgul. But
 there  waiting  still  before  the  gate   sat  Gandalf,   and  Shadowfax

 alone  among  the  free  horses  of  the  earth   did  not   [?quailj  but
 stood rooted as an image of grey marble.                                   
    'You  cannot  pass,'  said  Gandalf.  'Go  back  to  the   black  abyss
 prepared  for  you,  and  fall  into  nothingness  that  shall  come  upon
 your Master.'                                                             
    The   Black   Rider   [?lay  for   laid]  back   his  hood   and  .....
 crown  that  sat  upon  no  visible  head save  only for  the light  of his
 pale eyes.(19) A deadly laughter [?rang] out.                               
    'Old  fool,'  he  said.  'Old  fool.  Do  you   not  know   death  when
 you see  it?  Die   now  and   curse  in   vain.  This   is  my   hour  of
 victory.'  And  with  that  he  lifted  his   great  sword.   [Added:  And
 then  suddenly  his  hand  wavered  and   fell  and   it  seemed   that  he
 shrank.]  And  [>  For)  in  that   very  moment   away  behind   in  some
 counrtyard  of  the  city  a  cock  crowed.  Shrill  and  clear  he  crowed,
 recking    nothing   of    wizardry   or    war,   welcoming    only   the
 morning   that   far   above  the   shadows  of   death  was   now  coming
 once again.                                                               
    And  as  if  in  answer  there  came  from   far  away   another  note.
 Horns,  horns,   horns,  great   horns  of   the  north   wildly  blowing.
 The riders of Rohan had come at last.                                     
                                                                          
 From  short  passages of  further drafting,  either separate  or pencilled
 on the fair copy manuscript itself  and then  overwritten, the  final form
 of the story was largely reached, and there is nothing  to notice  in this
 development.  But  as  the  fair  copy  was  left to  stand there  remained a
 differences   from   RK.   The   account   of  Pippin's   watching  beside
 Denethor and Faramir remained essentially as it was  in the  initial draft
 p.  335),  where  Denethor  himself  does  not  speak,  and  the  cause of
 his devastation is expressed as a  surmise of  Pippin's: 'Grief  maybe had
 wrought  it:  grief  at  the harsh  words he  spoke when  Faramir returned
 [>  remorse  for  the  harsh  words he  spoke that  sent Faramir  out into
 needless  peril],(20) and  the  bitter  thought  that, whatever  might now
 betide  in  war,  woe  or  victory  beyond  all  hope,  his  line  too was
 ending ...'                                                               
                                                                          
       The description of the journey of the bearers of Faramir, with      
 Denethor  and  Pippin,  after  they  had  passed through  the gate  of the
 Citadel, begins thus (cf. RK pp. 99-100):                                 
                                                                          
 Turning westward they came at last to a dark door,  used only              
 by the Lord of the City, for it opened on a winding way that              
 descended by many curves down  to the  narrow land  under the              
 shadow of Mindolluin's precipice where stood the tombs of the              
 Kings and their Stewards.                                                  
                                                                          
 But from this point the text  reaches effectively  the form  in RK  in the

                                                              
                                                                              
 description  of  the  descent  to  Rath  Dinen,   the  Silent   Street.(21) The
 passage  just  cited reappears  in the first typescript  of the  chapter, with
 the  addition  that  the  door  was  'in  the  rearward  wall  of   the  sixth
 circle'; but  the final text was  entered on  the typescript  in a  rider, and
 here  the  name  of  the  door  appears: 'Fenn  Fornen, for  it was  kept ever
 shut save at times of funeral'.(22)                                           
     Pippin's  encounter with  Berithil as  he fled  from the  horrifying scene
 in Rath Dinen begins differently from its form in RK (p. 101):                
                                                                              
     'Whither do you run, Master Peregrin?' he said.                           
     'To find Mithrandir,' answered Pippin.                                    
     'Then have you left the service of the Lord so soon? We hold              
 that it is the duty of those who wear the black and silver to                 
 remain in the Citadel of Gondor whatever else may chance,                     
 until death release them.'(23)                                                
     'Or the Lord,' said Pippin.                                               
     'Then he sends you on some errand that I should not hinder. ?            
 But tell me, if you may, what goes forward? ...'                              
                                                                              
 The text  then continues  as in  RK; but  Pippin was  still permitted  at this
 fateful  moment  a  more  Shire-like  turn  of  phrase:  'Something  is  wrong
 with  him',  he  says  of  Denethor  (where  in  RK  he  says  'He is  fey and
 dangerous'),  and  he  tells Berithil:  'Don't bother  about "orders"  and all
 that!'                                                                        
                                                                              
     Lastly,  it  is  worth  remarking  that  the importance  of the  Prince of
 Dol  Amroth  was  enlarged  as  the  chapter  evolved. In  the draft  C Pippin
 did  not  name  him  among  the 'great  persons' present  at the  council held
 before   Faramir's   return   from   Henneth   Annun   (p.   326),   and  this
 remains  the  case  in  the  fair  copy  D. The  Prince's intervention  in the
 deliberations  before  Faramir  went  to  Osgiliath  is  absent  in  the first
 version  of  D  (p.  333): it  enters with  the revision  (where he  is called
 'Dol  Amroth').  His  bringing  of  Faramir  to  the  White  Tower  was  never
 added to D (note 17).  And in  drafting for  the latter  part of  D he  is not
 mentioned   as  accompanying   Gandalf  in   his  tireless   permabulation  of
 the  City  (p.  335)  -  the  passage  in  which  he  is  introduced  here (RK
 p.  98),  with the  reference to  there being  'Elvish blood  in the  veins of
 that folk,  for the  people of  Nimrodel dwelt  once in  that land  long ago',
 was  in  fact  written into  the D  manuscript as  an afterthought  soon after
 my  father  had  passed  this  point.  At  this  stage  the  name  Imrahil had
 still not emerged (see pp. 287, 289).                                         
                                                                              
                                     NOTES.                                    
                                                                              
 1. The  account  of Pippin's  livery is  in every  point as  described in
    RK, save only that the  silver star  on the  circlet of  his helm  is not
    mentioned.                                                          

  2.  Berethil is clearly written so, Berithil in the first  typescript of
      'Minas  Tirith',  p.  288;  after  further occurrences  of Berethil,
      however, Berithil reappears.                                        
  3.  Ramas  Coren:  earlier  name  of  the  Wall  about the  Pelennor (p.
      288).                                                               
  4.  I  have  inverted  the  order  of  the last  two paragraphs  of this
      outline.                                                            
  5.  On this and subsequent  references to  days and  times see  the Note
      on Chronology below.                                                
  6.  75  leagues  from  Henneth  Annun  to  Minas  Tirith: 25  leagues in
      RK.  The  distance  on  my  father's  large  map  of  Rohan,  Gondor
      and  Mordor  which  I  redrew  in The  Return of  the King  is about
      23 leagues. The figure 75 in the present  text is  however perfectly
      clear, although the  following text  D, directly  based here  on the
      present draft, has 25. On  the First  Map the  distance can  be very
      roughly  computed  to something  in the  region of  75 miles,  and I
      suppose that my father,  working very  fast, simply  wrote 'leagues'
      for 'miles'.                                                        
  7.  The illegible word  seems to  begin with  d and  might be  duty, but
      the writing is so unclear that it might be  dealings, or  some other
      word.  In  the  following text,  where Denethor  still says  that he
      knows 'the answer to the riddling words',  the sentence  is replaced
      by 'Poor Boromir! ' > 'Alas for Boromir!'                          
  8.  The word I have given as '[?either]' is in fact hard to interpret in
      any  other  way.  Possibly  the  sentence  was left  unfinished. The
      following text has the reading  of RK  (p. 87),  'save by  a victory
      so  final  that  what  then befell  would not  trouble us,  the dead
      [> being dead].'                                                    
  9.  Pippin says of Frodo: 'Just think, he was alive at least up  to this
      time yesterday, and  not so  far away  across the  River!' I  do not
      know why Pippin should  say 'at  least up  to this  rime yesterday',
      since  Faramir  had  said  that  he  had parted  with Frodo  and Sam
      'yestermorn'. The following text has: 'he was  alive and  talking to
      Faramir only yesterday'.  - In  Gandalf's reckoning  of the  time he
      says: 'Let me  see, he  would discover  some four  days ago  that we
      had  thrown  down  Saruman  -  and  had  the  Stone,'  where  RK has
      'five'. See the Note on Chronology below.                            
 10.  The  following text  has: 'So  I told  Aragorn, on  the day  when we
      met  again  in Fangorn  and rode  down to  Rohan.' The  reference is
      to  The  White  Rider,  TT  p.  100:  For imagining  war he  has let
      loose  war,  believing  that  he  has no  time to  waste ...  So the
      forces  that  he  has  long  been  preparing  he  is now  setting in
      motion, sooner than he intended.'                                   
 11.  Cf.  the  original  outline  on  p. 326:  'Pippin ...  hears Faramir
      accept orders to go to Osgiliath.'                                  
 12.  In RK (p. 91) Gandalf does  not leave  the City  until news  comes of
      Faramir's retreat to the wall of the Pelennor.                      

  13.  The square brackets are in the original.                            
  14.  Here  the  passage  in  ink  breaks  off;  the  sentence  would have
       continued with the sortie from the Gate.                            
  15.  I note here a few details. All the references to  date remain  as in
       the  draft.  The  distance  from  Henneth  Annun  to   Minas  Tirith
       becomes 25 leagues (see note 6). Peregrin's friend is  Berithil (see
       note  2;  Beregond  only  entered at  a late  stage). The  island in
       Anduin   receives   momentarily  the   name  Cairros,   changed  im-
       mediately to Andros (and later to Cair Andros).                     
  16.  This appears from a note  written on  a slip  in which  the existing
       opening of the chapter (see p. 325) was rewritten. In  this revision
       was introduced the fact of Berithil's having  just returned  from an
       errand  over  the  Pelennor  'to  Bered  Ondrath,  the  guard-towers
       upon  the  entrance  of  the causeway'.  This name  was subsequently
       lost.                                                               
  17.  I  notice here  two features  in which  the narrative  differed from
       that  in  RK,  and  a  few  other  details.  The  account  of Prince
       Imrahil's  bringing  Faramir  to  Denethor in  the White  Tower, and
       the light seen flickering in the high chamber (RK pp.  94 -  5), is
       absent not only from the initial draft but also  from the  fair copy
       D;  and  the last  men to  come into  the City  before the  Gate was
       shut  (RK  p.  95),  reporting the  'endless companies  of men  of a
       new  sort'  who  held  the  northward  road  or  had  gone  on  into
       Anorien, are not said to be led by Ingold in the draft.             
          In both draft and tair  copy the  'wild Southron  men' of  RK (p.
       95) are 'wild eastlanders'. The wall of the Pelennor is still called
       Ramas  Coren  in  both  texts  where  RK has  'the Rammas'  (p. 95),
       with '(? Corramas)' added at the  time of  writing. In  the sentence
       (RK  p.  94)  'And  in  his  arms before  him on  his horse  he [the
       Prince] bore the body  of his  kinsman, Faramir  son of  Denethor' a
       word is written above 'kinsman' in the draft  text which  looks like
       'cousin';  this  seems to  have been  struck through.  The genealogy
       of the  house of  Dol Amroth  is found  in LR,  Appendix A  (I, iv):
       Denethor  married  (late)  Finduilas  daughter  of  Adrahil  of  Dol
       Amroth.  Elsewhere  it  is  recorded (see  Unfinished Tales  p. 248)
       that Adrahil was the father of Imrahil, so that Imrahil  (brother of
       Finduilas) was Faramir's uncle.                                     
  18.  This is curious, because  in the  D manuscript  as written  (when it
       was  Faramir  who  imposed  his  own  will  on  the  council  in his
       demand  to  lead  a  force  to  Osgiliath)  Denethor  (as  reported)
       spoke  no  harsh  words  to  Faramir, and  indeed bade  him farewell
       with the  words 'may  your judgement  prove just:  at least  so much
       that I may see you again' (p. 333). This may suggest that  the later
       version  of this  episode was  already in  being, in  which Denethor
       says: 'But I will not yield the River and the fields of the Pelennor
       unfought - not if there is a captain that will do my will, and quail

                
                                                                               
 not' (cf. RK p. 90).                                                           
19.  The   handwriting   here   is   such   that   many   words   could    not   be
 interpreted  at  all  in  isolation,  without  context  or  other  clues,  but
 'save  only  for  the  light  of  his  pale eyes'  seems tolerably  clear. Cf.
 p. 365.                                                                        
20.  See note 18.                                                                
21.  The  name  Rath  Dinen  appears  on  the  plan  of  the  city  reproduced      
 on  p.  290  from  the first  typescript of  the chapter  'Minas Tirith',      
 where however the conception of it was decisively different.                   
22.  Other  names  are  written  beside  this  rider:  Fenn  Forn  the  Closed      
 poor,  Fenn  uiforn  the  Ever  Closed,  also   Uidavnen  and   the  word      
 davnan.                                                                        
23.  These   words,  slightly   changed,  were   afterwards  spoken   by  Gan-      
 dalf  to  Pippin  at  the  beginning   of  the   chapter  'The   Pyre  of      
 Denethor' (RK p. 126).                                                         
                                                                               
                             Note on the Chronology.                            
                                                                               
 The  new  'calendar'  (i.e.  with  dates  in  March  instead of  February, see
 p. 325) can be equated with the  old from  the date  of the  first day  of the
 Darkness,   Pippin's   second   day   in   Minas   Tirith,   which   had  been
 February  7  and  is  now  March  9.  I  presume  that  my  father  calculated
 this  on  the  basis  that  all  months  now had  thirty days.  Thus proceeding
 ',;  from 26  December  =  26  January,  the  day   of  Frodo's   flight  (see
 VII.368),  there  are  the   following  equations:   December  31   =  February
 1;  January  1  =  February  2;  January  29  =  February  30;  January  30  =
 March 1; January 31 = March 2; February 1 = March 3.                           
  The  chronology,  however,  is  still  not  that  of  LR  (see  The  Tale  of
 Years).  At  this  stage  Faramir  says  (on  9  March)   that  he   had  parted
 with   Frodo   and   Sam   at   Henneth   Annun   on   the   morning   of  the
 previous  day  ('in  the  morning  two  days  ago',  RK  p.  85), and  he says
 that  the  Darkness  began  to  come  over that  night ('yestereve',  RK). The
 relation between the two chronologies can be set out thus:                     
                                                                               
     The present chronology.                   The chronology in LR.            
                                                                               
 March 7 Frodo taken by Faramir to                     
        Henneth Annun.                         
                                                                               
 March 8 Frodo leaves Henneth                  
     Annun.                                    
     Gandalf reaches Minas                                                      
     Tirith.                                                                    
                                               Frodo taken by Faramir to
                                               Henneth Annun.

                                               Frodo leaves Henneth                                
                                               Annun.                           
 March 9.  The Dawnless Day.              Gandalf reaches Minas       
           Faramir rescued on the         Tirith.                      
           Pelennor.                                                   
           Frodo reaches the Cross-                                    
           roads.                                                      
                                                                      
 March 10. Faramir goes to Osgiliath.      The Dawnless Day.            
                                          Faramir rescued on the       
                                          Pelennor.                    
                                          Frodo reaches the Cross-     
                                          roads.                       
                                                                      
 March 11. Faramir retreats to the         Faramir goes to Osgiliath.
            Causeway Forts.                                            
                                                                      
   Thus the horns  of the  Rohirrim are  heard at  cockcrow on  March 14
 in the chronology of the present texts, but on March 15 in LR.  At this
 stage Frodo still takes two days, not three, from Henneth Annun  to the
 Cross-roads (see p.  182), and  Gandalf takes  three nights,  not four,
 from Dol Baran to Minas Tirith (see p. 264 note 3).                   
   Gandalf, speaking to Pippin on the night of 9 March, reckons  that it
 was now  four days  since Sauron  discovered 'that  we had  thrown down
 Saruman  -  and had  the Stone'  (note 9),  whereas in  RK (p.  88), on
 10 March, he reckons the time as five days. He is referring to  5 March
 (= February 3),  and the  difference is  again due  to the  longer time
 taken on his ride.                                                    

                                    VII.                                 
                                                                          
                          THE RIDE OF THE ROHIRRIM.                        
                                                                          
 p, single manuscript page ('A') gives an outline for the narrative  of this
 chapter. It was written in ink over a pencilled text - which at  this stage
 had   again   and  unhappily   become  my   father's  frequent   method  of
 composition.  The  figures  introducing  each  paragraph  are of  course the
 dates in the month of March.                                              
                                                                          
 (9)   Theoden   leaves   Dunharrow   on   9th.   He   rides  25   miles  to
 Edoras.  After  a  halt  there  and  reviewing  the  garrison  he  sets out
 East.  At  first  they  go  slow  to  conserve  strength.  Merry  is  given
 leave  to  go  to  war,  and is  assigned to  ride with  one of  the king's
 guard:  the  one  who  seems  young  and  light  and  so  less   burden  to
 his  steed.  He  is  silent  and  never  speaks.  They  halt  not  far from
 where   the   Snowbourn   runs   into   Entwash   25   miles   from  Edoras
 - they bivouac in dense willow-thickets.                                  
 (10)   They   ride   steadily   and   halt  now   nearly  100   miles  from
 Edoras.                                                                   
 (11)   They   ride   again.    When   125    miles   out    about   midday
 fugitives  and  late  joining  riders  bring  news  of  attacks  in  North,
 and   of   forces   crossing   above   Sarn   Gebir (1) into  the   Wold  of
 Rohan.  Theoden  decides  that   he  has   left  sufficient   garrison  (or
 all  possible)  in  his  strong  places,  and  must   ride  on:   soon  the
 marshes  of  Entwash  mouth  will   cover  his   flank.  They   cross  into
 Anorien   (of   Gondor)   and   camp   under   Halifirien   (160  [miles]).
 Mysterious   drums   are   heard   in   the   woods   and   hills.  Theoden
 resolves to ride warily, and sends out scouts.                            
 (12)  They  halt  some  230  miles  on  at  dusk  (64  miles  or   a  day's
 ride  from  Pelennor).  They  camp  in   the  skirts   of  the   Forest  of
 Eilenach  out  of  which   rises  Eilenach   Beacon.  Scouts   return  with
 the   errand-riders   of   Minas   Tirith   (who   had  ridden   ahead  but
 found   entrance   closed).   There  is   a  great   camp  of   enemy  under
 [Amon   Din   >]   Min   Rimmon   about   [25   >]   50   miles   west   of
 the   Pelennor   or  about   [40  >]   14  miles   further  on:(2) Orcs are
 roving   along   the   road.   Dark   men   of   Eilenach  come   in.  They
 decide  to  push  on  by  night.   Suddenly  they   see  fires   ahead  and
 hear  cries.  A   great  hoom   hom  is   heard.  Ents!   Treebeard  cries
 Merry.   The   enemy   camp  is   in  confusion.   Dark  men   of  Eilenach

 have  attacked  it,  and suddenly  coming out  of North  after a          
 victory over Orcs in Wold ([250  >] 225  miles) Treebeard  and a          
 company of Ents.  The Rohirrim  come round  to rear  [and] sweep          
 the  remnants  away  N.W.  into  marshes.  They  halt  under Min          
 Rimmon and take counsel of war.                                           
 (13) Morning of 13th. Scouts report that siege is  now [?strait]          
 and great fires and engines are all about walls. They ride about          
 20 miles and [? hide] in the woods and hills  of Amon  Din ready          
 to move at night and attack with dawn.                                    
 (14)  At  dawn  they charge.  Rammas has  been destroyed  at this          
 point.                                                                    
                                                                          
   At the foot of the page, in pencil, is a list of distances: Eilenach 215
 (written   beneath:  219);   Min  Rimmon   245  (written   beneath:  246);
 Amon  Din  270;  Rammas  294;  Minas  Tirith  306.(3) Beside  this list  is a
 note: 'Camp just west of Min Rimmon (243 miles) on night of 12th.'        
   The names of the beacons  in their  final forms  and final  order (which
 I  count  eastwards  from  Edoras)  had  appeared   long  before   in  the
 abandoned  opening  C of  'Minas Tirith'  (p. 233;  repeated in  the first
 text of the chapter), but now the order has been changed:                 
                                                                          
        Early texts of 'Minas.               The present text.          
                                                                         
            Tirith' and LR                                                 
         1. Halifirien.                       1. Halifirien.              
         2. Calenhad.                         2. Calenhad.                  
         3. Min Rimmon.                       3. Erelas.                    
         4. Erelas.                           4. Nardol.                    
         5. Nardol.                           5. Eilenach.                  
         6. Eilenach.                         6. Min Rimmon.                
         7. Amon Din.                         7. Amon Din.                  
                                                                          
 I  can  offer  no  explanation  for  this  other  than  the obvious  but not
 entirely  convincing  one  that  my  father  had  misremembered   the  order
 as  it  stood  in  the  'Minas  Tirith' text,  and that  afterwards, looking
 back through the papers, he returned to it.                               
   So  in  the  outline  A  the  Rohirrim  camped  on the  night of  March 12
 'in  the  skirts  of  the  Forest of  Eilenach out  of which  rises Eilenach
 Beacon',  and  here  'the  dark  men  of  Eilenach'  enter the  story, fore-
 runners  of  the  Woses  or  Wild  Men  of  the  Woods,  though  nothing  is
 said  of  them  other  than  that   they  attacked   the  enemy   camp  (the
 drumming   in   the   hills  is   heard,  however,   from  the   camp  under
 Halifirien  on  the  previous  night,   March  11).   Thus  the   Forest  of
 Eilenach  is  the  forerunner  of  the Druadan  Forest, but  Eilenach Beacon
 is the fifth, and beyond it are still Min Rimmon and Amon Din.            
   Treebeard  and  the  Ents  reappear,  coming south  'after a  victory over
 Orcs in the Wold', and clearly they play a part  in the  attack on  the camp

  (I take  it that  the meaning  of the  text at  this point  is 'Dark  men of
  Eilenach  have  attacked  it,  and  so  also have  Treebeard and  a company
  of Ents suddenly  coming out  of the  North'). In  the early  outlines for
  Book V there  are several  references to  the southward  march of  the Ents
  after the destruction of the  Orcs on  the Wold  (see p.  255 and  note 29),
  but these all specifically refer to their arrival (together with Elves from
  Lorien) after the  siege of  Minas Tirith  had been  broken: there  has been
  no suggestion that they appeared earlier, in Anorien.                      
    Merry is here 'given leave to go  to war,  and is  assigned to  ride with
  one of the king's guard:  the one  who seems  young and  light and  so less
  burden to his steed.' This is presumably the  story that  my father  had in
  mind  at  the  end  of  'Many  Roads  Lead  Eastward'  (see p.  318), where
  one  among  the  guard,  noticeably  slighter   in  build   (and  certainly
  Eowyn),  looked  at  Merry  as   the  ride   began  from   Dunharrow:  this
  Rider would be assigned to carry the hobbit.                               
    Two  pages  of  pencilled  text  are hard  to place  since they  are very
  largely illegible on  account of  subsequent overwriting  in ink;  bur they
  are very noteworthy, since from what  little can  be read  it is  seen that
  my father was here  developing the  story of  the coming  of the  Ents into
  Anorien  from  the  outline  just  given.  The narrative  envisaged clearly
  ran  into  difficulties,   and  was   decisively  abandoned,   without  any
  repercussions  in  the  development  of  the  chapter;  for this  reason it
  seems   most  probable   that  they   should  be   placed  here.   The  ink
  overwriting  that  so  ohscured  them  bears no  relation to  the pencilled
  text beneath.(4)                                                            
    On one of these pages (which I take to be  the first  in order  since the
  arrival  of  Treebeard  appears,  whereas  on  the  other  he   is  already
  present) Treebeard's call  of hoom  hom (or  something similar)  is heard;
  'Merry  sprang  up.  "Treebeard!"  he  cried.  Treebeard  comes  with  good
  news.  The  Ents  and  the  Huorns  had  .....  the  invaders  on  the Wold
  and  driven  them  into  the  River.' Fragments  of the  following sentence
  refer  to  rumour  of the  ride of  the Rohirrim  having reached  the Ents,
  and  to  their  great  march southwards  to aid  the king.  'Friendship and
  award  the  king offered.  But he  asked only  leave when  war was  over to
  return  to  Fangorn  and  there  be  troubled  by   .....  For   reward  he
  would take .......'                                                        
                                                                            
    No  more  than  broken  fragments  can  be  discerned  in  the  remainder
  of this page, but  these suggest  uncertainty of  direction. 'They  plan to
  divide  into  three.  The  Ents  would  come  on  the  camp from  the north
  first  while  the  main  host  ....,  .and  so  come   down  to   the  plain
  [?somewhat]  behind  the  camp  between it  and the  leaguer of  the city';
  Or remove the  host of  orc-men .,  and later,  In that  case the  wild men
  slay  orcs  but  also turn  against king.  But the  riders brush  them aside
  and reach Amon Din ...'                                                    
    The  other  page  begins  thus:  'But  the  wild men  were nowhere  to be
  seen. At the first sight of the Ents they had cried out  shrieks of  fear and

  fled back to vanish into  the hills  ..... what  dark and  distant legends
  out  of  [?elder] days  held their  minds enthralled  none could  say. But
  Treebeard  soon  found  for  himself  what he  needed .........  a [?pool]
  under the  side of  Amon Din  fed by  a spring  [?above]. There  he stood
  and [? laved] himself while the king and his  captains held  council under
  the  trees.'  After  '"Both  ...  and  warriors  are  needed,  lord," said
  Eomer' follows:  'Some few  at least  must have  escaped eastward  to give
  warning of our approach.' Does this refer to the Wild Men?                
    From the  rest of  this page  scarcely anything  useful can  be gleaned,
  but  the  sentence  'The  wild men  lead them  again along  hill-paths' is
  clear;  which  is  puzzling,  since  there  seems  not  to be  enough text
  intervening to explain the reversal of the story just given.              
    Nothing  more  is  found  anywhere  touching  on  the appearance  of the
  Ents  in  Anorien,  and  the reason  for their  disappearance can  only be
  guessed  at.  It  seems  to me  possible that  something on  the following
  lines  may  lie  behind  it.  The vast  armies at  the disposal  of Mordor
  made  it  a  certainty  that  a  host  would  be  dispatched  beyond Minas
  Tirith  into Anorien  in order  to block  any attempt  from Rohan  to come
  to the aid of the city: this could be said to be a datum of the story. But
  an  assault  on  the  orc-camp  would   necessarily  constitute   a  major
  episode,  and  my  father  wanted  such  an  episode  at this  juncture no
  more  than  did  the  Rohirrim. The  Wild Men,  who (as  'the dark  men of
  Eilenach') had entered in outline A  as attackers  of the  orc-camp, found
  their role in leading the Rohirrim  by forgotten  roads through  the hills
  known  only  to  themselves,  so  that the  orc-camp was  entirely circum-
  vented. The Ents therefore had no clear function left to them. This  is of
  course  pure  speculation;  there  are  no notes  found pertaining  to the
  question. But at any rate  the explanation  cannot be  that my  father had
  come to  feel (independently  of the  immediate story  as it  was emerging
  here)  that  Treebeard  should  not  appear  again  in  person  until  the
  reunited  Company  met  him  once  more  on  the  homeward   journey:  see
  p. 361.                                                                   
                                                                           
    My  father  had great  difficulty with  the question  of how  Merry went
  to Minas Tirith, and  indeed with  finding a  satisfactory opening  to the
  chapter.  The  previous  chapter  in the  narrative sequence  ('Many Roads
  Lead  Eastwards')  had  ended  with  the  host  of  the  Rohirrim  passing
  down  Harrowdale;  now  something  must  be  told  of  the halt  at Edoras
  - but at the same time he would prefer to pass  over the  uneventful first
  days of the ride and begin the chapter at a later point.                  
    His first solution, in a very brief and  very rough  text ('B'),  was to
  open with  the Riders  halted on  the third  night (March  11)  below the
  Halifirien, where, as in  the outline  A, the  mysterious drums  are heard
  in the  hills, and  to introduce  the halt  at Edoras  as a  retrospect of
  Merry's  as  he  reviewed  his  situation,  lying under  the trees  in the
  darkness.                                                                 

                                  
                                                                       
 It  was  so  dark  that Merry  could see  nothing as  he lay  rolled in
 his  blankets;  but  though  it  was  an  airless  windless  night  all
 about  was  the  soft  whisper  of  endless  dark  trees. He  lifted his
 head. There  it  was   again,  a   sound  like   faint  drums   in  the
 wooded   hills   and   mountain-steps   to   the   south,   drums  that
 stopped   and   seemed   to   be   answered   from  other   places.  He
 wondered  if  the  watchmen  heard   it.  Though   he  could   not  see
 them  he   knew   that    all   round    him   were    companies   upon
 companies  of  the  Riders.  He  could  smell the  horses in  the dark,
 and  hear  now  and  again  their  stamping and  shifting on  the soft
 needle-clad   ground.   They   were   bivouacked   in   the  pinewoods
 at  clustered  about the  dark Halifirien:  a great  hill, flat-topped,
 standing   out   from   the   [?main]   range   beside  the   road  from
 Edoras on the borders of Anorien.                                      
  He  was  tired  but  could  not  sleep.  He had  ridden now  for three
 days  since  the  dark  morning  of  the  muster  at Dunharrow,  and at
 each  halt  the  darkness  seemed   to  deepen,   and  his   heart  and
 spirits  to  fall  lower.  There  was  now  no  song  or speech  on the
 way  in  all  the  great  host  of  Rohan.  At  Edoras they  had halted
 for  a while  and then  at last  he obtained  the king's  permission to
 go   on   to   battle   with  him.   He  now   wondered  why.   It  was
 arranged  that  he  was to  ride before  one of  the king's  guard, and
 it  seemed  that  the  young  man  whom  he  had  noticed  had  claimed
 him,  since  he  was  lighter  of build  than the  others, so  that his
 steed  was less  burdened. At  any rate  as they  rode forth  at last
 from  Edoras  Merry  had  been  helped  up  to  this  man's   seat,  and
 there  he  had  [?sat]  ...  while  men  were riding,  but never  a word
 did his  companion  utter,  at  mounting  or  dismounting  or   on  the
 way.                                                                 
                                                                       
 All the last part of this text (from 'At Edoras  they had  halted ...')
 was  struck  out,  and  the following  substituted: 'and  already he
 Wondered why  he had  been so  determined to  come against  [?even] the
 king's  command.  Not  a  word  more  since the  first day  had Grimhelm
 spoken [?whether] at mounting or dismounting or on the road.'            
  My  father  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  Merry  had  not been
 given  permission  by  Theoden  to  come  with the  host of  Rohan to
 Minas Tirith; and he had decided also - perhaps for this reason - that
 the halt  at  Edoras  had  best  be  recounted  in direct  narrative. He
 therefore  began  a  new  opening  for the  chapter in  another extremely
 rough manuscript ('C'), entitled 'The Ride of the Rohirrim':              
                                                                       
   The king  came  to  Edoras in  the gathering  dark, though  it was
 but  noon.  There  he  halted  and  said  farewell  to his  golden hall

 and  the  people  of  his  house.  Merry  begged not  to be  parted from
 him.                                                                    
   'This  is  no  journey  for  Stybba,'  said   Theoden.  'We   ride  to
 war,  and  in  such  battle  as  we  hope  to  make  what would  you do,
 Master   Holbytla,  sworn   swordthain  though   you  are   and  greater
 of heart than of ...?'                                                  
   'As  for  that,  who  can   tell?'  answered   Merry.  'And   why  did
 you  take  me  as  swordthain  if  1  was  to  be  left  behind  when my
 lord rides to war?'                                                     
   'If  the  battle  were  here  we  would  see  how you  bore yourself,'
 said  Theoden,  'but   it  is   100  leagues   or  more   to Mundbeorg (5)
 where  Denethor  is  lord.  And  the  first thing  for my  swordthain to
 do is to hear the commands of his lord.'                                
   Merry  went  out  unhappy  and   looked  at   the  lines   of  horses.
 The   companies   were   already   being   ordered   for    the   start.
 Suddenly  a  Rider  came  up  to  him,  and spoke  softly in  a whisper.
 'Where  will  u-ants not,  a way  opens, say  we,' he  said. 'So  have I
 found  myself.'  Merry  [?looked]   ...  rider   of  the   king's  guard
 whom  he  noticed  before.  'You  wish  to  go  where  the  lord  of the
 Eorlingas goes?'                                                        
   'I  do,'  said  Merry.  'Then  you  shall  ride  before me,'  said the
 Rider.  'Such  good  will  shall  not  be  wasted.  Say   nothing  more,
 but come.'                                                              
   'Thank   you   indeed,  thank   you  sir   -  I   do  not   know  your
 name.'                                                                  
   'Do  you  not?'  said  the  Rider  softly.  'Then  call  me [Cyneferth
 >] Grimhelm.'(6)                                                       
                                                                        
 (9)  So  it  was  that when  the king  set forth  again before          
 Grimhelm sat  Meriadoc the  hobbit, and  his great  grey steed          
 made little of the burden, for Grimhelm was less in build than          
 most of the guard though  lithe and  well-knit in  shape. That          
 [?eveningj  they  camped  in the  willow thickets  where Snow-          
 bourn ... into Entwash 12 leagues or more east of Edoras.               
                                                                        
   The text then tails off into scrawled and partly illegible notes about
 the next two days' journey: on  the third  day, with  the date  March 11
 (cf. outline A, p. 343), 'men rode in joining the muster late, and the)'
 brought  rumours  of  war in  the North  and of  Orcs crossing  into the
 Wold above Sarn  Gebir'; to  which news  Eomer said:  'Too late  to turn
 back or aside.'                                                         
   It was now, as the name Grimhelm  shows, that  the conclusion  of the
 text B, with the story that Merry rode with  the king's  permission, was
 rejected (p. 347).(7)                                                   

  My  father  evidently  decided   now  (probably,   as  I   have  suggested,
  because  he  did  not wish  to treat  each day  of the  ride from  Edoras in
  consecutive narrative) that this passage, recounting  the king's  denial of
  Merry's  request  and  Grimhelm's  stepping secretly  into the  breach, had
  best  be   placed  at   the  end   of  'Many   Roads  Lead   Eastward'  ('The
  Muster  of  Rohan');  and the  next text  ('D') (8) was  marked 'Place  this at
  the end  of  Chapter  II  of  Book  V'.  The  alliterative  song  From dark
  Dunharrow  in  the  dim morning  had not  yet arisen.  The 'young  rider of
  the guard'  still  names   himself  Grimhelm,   but  with   an  alternative
  Derning,  and  a  further  suggestion  Dernhelm.  The  conclusion   of  the
  passage  in  RK  (p.  78,  the  end  of  'The  Muster  of  Rohan')  is  now
  present,  with  mention  of  the  Folde  and the  Fenmarch, but  whereas in
  RK   four  beacon-hills   are  named   after  Halifirien   (Calenhad,  Min-
  Rimmon,  Erelas,  Nardol)  here  there  are  only three:  Calenhad, Erelas,
  Nardol, with omission of Min-Rimmon (see p. 344).                          
    Rough  workings  for  From  dark  Dunharrow  in   the  dim   morning  are
  found, and the song was then incorporated into a further text ('E')(9)     
  ('to be added  to Chapter  II of  Book V').  The Rider  who bears  Merry is
  here  still  called Grimhelm  (with 'Dernhelm?'  written beside);  and four
  beacon-hills  are  now  named,  but  still  with   the  omission   of  Min-
  Rimmon:  Calenhad,  Erelas,  Nardol,  Eilenach  (because,  when   this  was
  written,  Eilenach  had already  been passed  when the  story told  in 'The
  Ride of the Rohirrim' begins).                                             
    Finally, the alliterative song with the  following text  was copied  in a
  fine  manuscript  and  attached  to   the  typescript   M  of   'Many  Roads
  Lead Eastward': here the  song is  all but  in final  form.(10) There are now
  no differences from RK in the conclusion of the earlier chapter, except
  that Dernhelm remains 'a young rider of the guard'.(11)                    
                                                                            
    The  development  of  the  new  opening  of  'The  Ride of  the Rohirrim'
  (i.e.,  when  the  story  of  the  halt  at  Edoras  had  been  removed) is
  particularly  hard to  analyse. There  is here  no continuous  primary text
  followed  by  a  continuous  second version:  my father  wrote in  a series
  of  overlapping  and  partly  discontinuous  stages, some  of which  are in
  pencil  overwritten  in  ink.  I shall  not attempt  here to  describe this
  complex in detail, especially since much of it is repetition, as  my father
  sought  to find  a satisfactory  articulation of  existing elements  in the
  story.                                                                     
    In the earliest brief text of this new start to  the chapter  (in pencil,
  but largely legible despite the overwriting)  the host  of the  Rohirrim is
  'bivouacked   in   the   pinewoods    that   clustered    about  Minrimmon
  Beacon'.  Merry  hears  a  sound  like  faint  drums  in the  wooded hills.
  They  had  been  riding  for  four  days, and  were now  less than  a day's
  ride  from  the  walls  of  the  Pelennor. Scouts  sent ahead  had returned
  with  the  errand-riders  of  Gondor  and  reported  that  Minas  Tirith was
  besieged,  that  another  host  was holding  the approach  to the  City, and

  that a part of that force was marching west  along the  road. 'Suddenly
  Merry  heard  the  soft  whisper  of  Dernhelm again.  Not a  word more
  had  he  spoken  since  Edoras,  either at  mounting or  dismounting or
  upon the way. "Come!" he said. "We  ride again  by night.  Battle comes
  to meet us." ' Here this text ends. It is clear that 'Minrimmon Beacon'
  has now replaced 'Eilenach Beacon' of the outline A (p. 343),(12) and in
  the ink  text written  over it  (with the  chapter number  'XLVII') Min
  Rimmon Beacon is 'a tall hill standing up from the  long ridges  of the
  forest of Taur-rimmon'.                                                
    In  a  second  pencilled  text, again  overwritten but  again largely
  legible, the  scouts report  that the  enemy host  was encamped  on the
  road  'between  Amon  Din  and  the  walls'.   Dernhelm  is   now  more
  communicative,  for  when  the  night riding  has begun  Merry ventures
  to put a  question to  him, and  gets an  answer. 'Drums,  Dernhelm. Do
  you  hear  them,  or  am  I  dreaming?  Is  that  the  enemy?' Dernhelm
  replies very much as does Elfhelm the Marshal in RK (p. 105)  after he
  stumbled over Merry in the dark, though more briefly:  'It is  the wild
  men of the hills. In many wooded vales they live secretly, but  most in
  this  region,  remnants  of  the  Dark Years.  They go  not to  war for
  Gondor or the Mark,  and ask  but to  live wild.  But now  the darkness
  troubles them and the coming of orcs: they fear lest the Dark  Years be
  come  again.  Let  us  be thankful.  For they  have offered  service to
  Theoden. They are now our guides.' Here this text ends in its turn.
    Ink  overwriting  advances the  story: Eothain  captain of  the guard'(13)
  stumbles over Merry lying on the ground, and it is he who tells Merry
  about the  meaning of  the drums:  'Those are  not orc-drums.  You hear
  the wild men of the hills: so they talk together. In many  wooded vales
  of these regions they live few and secretly.' Eothain makes  no mention
  of the use of  poisoned arrows  by the  Wild Men,  and nothing  is told
  here of any colloquy with  one of  them. The  text concludes  (from the
  end of Eothain's words to Merry):                                      
                                                                        
  '...  Let  us   be  thankful;   for  they   have  offered   service  to
  Theoden.  They  have  spied  on  the  enemy,  and  will guide  us, they
  say, by cunning paths.'                                                
    'Where?' said Merry.                                                 
    'That we shall learn ere  long, I  doubt not,'  said Eothain.  'But I
  must  hasten.  The  guard  is  to  lead  a  flank  march,  and  I  must
  soon  be  ready.'  He  vanished  in  the  dark,  and  at   that  moment
  'Come,'  said  the  soft  voice of  Dernhelm in  Merry's ear.  'We ride
  again. I am ready.'                                                    
    Soon  Merry  found   himself  riding   again,  slowly,   warily.  The
  guard   led  the   way  but   beside  each   horse  walked   with  long
  strides  strange  shapes  of  men,  hardly  to  be  seen in  the gloom,
  and   yet   somehow   Merry   was   reminded   of   the   Pukel-men  of

                                                                     
                                                                         
 Dunharrow.  Guided  by  these  unlooked  for friends  they turned
 away  southward  towards  the   hills,  filing   among  the   trees,  and
 then  turning   again   moved   further   along  hidden   tracks  through
 narrow dales and over the shoulders of dark hills.                       
   No  words  were  spoken.  Hours  seemed  to  pass,  and   yet  still
 the night held on.                                                        
                                                                         
   A new  draft in  ink (the  one that  was written  over and  so obscured
 the pencilled text concerning the  Ents and  the Wild  Men, p.  345) takes
 up at the point where the  captain of  the guard  (here left  unnamed and
 referred to as  'X') stumbles  over Merry.  He tells  him that  the Wild
 Men of the Woods 'still haunt  Rimmon Forest,  it is  said'; he  does not
 mention their poisoned arrows, but he says  that 'even  now one  of their
 headmen  is  being  taken  to  the  king.'  From  here  the  story  moves
 confidently  into  the  conversation  of  the  king  and  Eomer  with the
 headman   Ghan-buri-Ghan   (so  named   unhesitatingly  from   his  first
 appearance),  near  the  end  of which  this text  ends. Already  in this
 draft  the  final  form  is very  nearly achieved,  with Ghan-buri-Ghan's
 names  for  the  orcs  (gorgun),  and for  Minas Tirith  (Stonehouses).(14)
 Of  the  ancient road  made by  the men  of Gondor  through the  hills he
 says this:                                                               
                                                                         
 '...  They  went  to   Eilenach  with   great  wains.   Forgotten  now,
 but  not  by  wild  men.  Paths in  hills and  behind hills.  Long road
 runs  still  under  tree  and  grass  behind.   Rimmon  down   to  Din,
 and so back to horsemen road.'                                           
                                                                         
 It is to 'be remembered that at this stage  the Rohirrim  were bivouacked
 in the forest of  Taur-rimmon, out  of which  rose the  tall hill  of Min
 Rimmon  Beacon,  and  that  the  order  of  the  last  three  beacons was
 Eilenach, Min  Rimmon, Amon  Din (see  p. 344).  It is  natural therefore
 that  Ghan-buri-Ghan  should  speak  of  the  old  wain-road  to Eilenach
 running 'behind Rimmon down to Din' (see below).                         
   Turning now to the first completed  text, this  manuscript begins  as a
 fair copy of the draft work already described, but for the latter part of
 the chapter (from  the end  of the  conversation with  Ghan-buri-Ghan) it
 is  based  variously  on  overwritten  pencilled  text   and  independent
 passages of preliminary drafting in ink. In  this manuscript  the chapter
 as it stands in RK  was largely  reached, and  there are  only relatively
 minor matters  to mention.  It is  numbered 'XLVII'  and titled  '(i) The
 Ride of the Rohirrim'; beside this  my father  wrote afterwards  'and the
 Battle of the Pelennor Field', then struck it out.                       
   The  Rohirrim  are  still  camped  in  'Taur-rimmon Forest'  from which
 rises  Min  Rimmon  beacon.  Ghan-buri-Ghan  tells  of  the   wains  that
 went to  Eilenach  passing  'through  Rimmon',  where  he  clearly  means
 'the forest of Rimmon'; and he speaks  as in  the draft  of the  lost road

  that  lies  'there  behind  Rimmon  and  down  to  Din'.  Changes  made  to
  the  manuscript  in  these  passages  produced  the  text  of RK  (pp. 104,
  106-7),  but  this development  is rather  puzzling. The  host now  lies in
  the  Druadan  Forest  out  of  which  rises  Eilenach  Beacon;   and  Ghan-
  buri-Ghan   now   says   that   the   wains   went   'through   Druadan  to
  Rimmon';  but  his  words  about  the  old   road  remain   unchanged  from
  the  draft,  'there  behind Rimmon  and down  to Din'.  If we  suppose that
  after  the  order of  the beacons  had been  changed the  ancient wain-road
  went  all  the  way  to  Min  Rimmon   (and  the   change  of   'They  went
  through   Rimmon   to   Eilenach'   to  'They   went  through   Druadan  to
  Rimmon'  was  not  casually  made:  my  father   wrote  Rimmon   twice  and
  twice crossed it out before finally settling on this name),  it nonetheless
  seems  strange  that   Ghan-buri-Ghan,  in   the  Druadan   Forest,  should
  say  'there  behind   Rimmon',  since   Min  Rimmon   was  now   the  third
  beacon,  not  the  sixth,  and  some  seventy-five  miles  to  the  west of
  Eilenach.                                                                  
    The  Rider  who  stumbles  over   Merry  is   now  again   named  Eothain
  (see  p. 350),  but he  is now  'captain of  Eomer's company  (eored)'. By
  subsequent   correction   he   becomes  'Deorwin,   chief  of   the  king's
  knights  since  Hama's death',  and he  speaks to  Merry of  'the Druedain,
  Wild  Men of  the Woods',  who 'still  haunt Druadan  Forest, it  is said.'
  The  name  Druedain  is  not  found  in  the published  LR (in  the present
  manuscript  it  was  afterwards  replaced  by  Woses),  but   reappears  in
  Unfinished  Tales. At  a later  stage, the  Rider who  fell over  Merry and
  cursed  him  for  a  tree-root  became  Elfhelm,  while  Deorwin (Deorwine)
  survived in the story, still as chief of the king's knights, to be slain in
  the  Battle of  the Pelennor  Fields, his  name remembered  in the  song of
  the  Mounds  of  Mundburg  (RK  pp.  120,  125).  Elfhelm  makes  his first
  appearance  by  correction  to  the  present  manuscript, taking  over from
  Eomer  the  speech  beginning  'We   need  no   further  guides   ...'  (RK
  p. 109): here he is described as 'one of the captains'. In  the typescripts
  of  the  chapter,  where  he  has  replaced   Deorwine  as   the  stumbling
  Rider,  he is  called 'captain  of the  company with  which he  [Merry] was
  riding';  the  change  to  'the Marshal,  Elfhelm' was  made when  the book
  was in proof.                                                              
    After  Eomer's  counsel that  the Rohirrim  should rest  now and  set out
  again  at  night,  and  the  words  'To  this  the  king assented,  and the
  captains departed' (RK p. 109), my father set down a brief outline:        
                                                                            
    On the grass way they find Hirgon's body  and dead  horse -              
  facing  back  west.  They  are drawing  near the  Rammas when              
  they meet a runner in the dark and take  him captive;  but he              
  proves  to be  a soldier  of Gondor  that escaping  through a              
  postern has slipped through the leaguer and run for 14 miles.              
  He falls dying of wounds and exhaustion. 'Too late you come!'              

 he cried.  'The  first  circle  is  burning  and abandoned.  The Lord
 will  not   give   heed   to   the  defence.   Great  siege   towers  and
 engines. They are bringing up a huge Ram for the Gates.'                 
    Then  suddenly  as  he  looked  at  the  flame   far  off   the  heart
 swelled  in  Theoden,  as  of  one   who  is   fey,  and   without  more
 counsel he  seized  a  great  horn  and  blew  it, and  all the  horns in
 the host  took   up  the   challenge.  Then   without  more   debate  the
 Rohirrim   poured   in   upon  the   fields  of   Gondor  like   a  great
 torrent.                                                                  
                                                                         
   This passage was struck through; and from this point the develop-
 ment becomes for a stretch entirely obscure, a mosaic of repetitions
 and overwritings leading to the final text; but this was not achieved
 until after the manuscript was completed - the pagination shows that
 a page was added in here subsequently. Before this, the story was still
 that Dernhelm rode as a member of the king's guard, in the leading
 eored (see note 17); with the addition on the added page of the
 statement (RK p. 110) that 'Elfhelm's company came next, and now
 Merry noticed that Dernhelm had left his place and in the darkness
 was moving sceadily forward until ac last he was riding just in rear of
 the king's guard' thar story is seen to be abandoned: Dernhelm had
 been riding from Edoras in the second eored.
   On the added page is a small map. This marks the Druadan Forest
 and Stonewain Valley, the Anorien road, Eilenach (in its final position
 as the sixth beacon) and Amon Din, the 'Grey Woods' south-east of
 Amon Din, Mindolluin, Minas Tirith, and Osgiliath. The island of
 Cair Andros is shown, though not named, and most notably the
 Anduin now bends strongly west below Osgiliath, so that the walls of
 the Pelennor run along its bank for a stretch, and then turns still more
 sharply southwards (but the hills of Emyn Arnen are not shown): on
 this see p. 438. In one respect only does this map differ from the large-
 scale map of Rohan, Gondor and Mordor, and that is in the relation of
 Minas Tirith to Osgiliath.(15) Here the road across the Pelennor runs
 due east to the Causeway Forts (marked with small circles), and
 Osgiliath is due east of the city, whereas on the large map it lies to
 the north-east, and the road runs likewise; see the Second Map,
 pp.434, 438.
    In the remainder of 'The Ride of the Rohirrim' the final form was
 achieved in this manuscript almost word for word:(16) the speech of
 Widfara about the change in the wind, the disposition of the com-
 panies of the Rohirrim,(17) Merry's fear that the king would quail and
 turn back, his great cry (with echoes of the Old Norse Voluspa) 'Arise,
 arise, Riders of Theoden ...', and the likening of Theoden to 'Orome
 the Great in the Battle of the Valar when the world was young.'
   Lastly I must mention the inceresting name Forannest. Isolated notes

  show  my  father  working  out  this name,  without giving  any indication
  of its reference,(18) and on a page of the earliest drafting for the chapter,
  written  above  and  perhaps  associated  with  the  sentence  'They  were
  less  than  a  day's  ride  from  the  Rammas',  Forannest  appears again,
  followed  by  the  words  'North  entrance  [?in]'. That  Forannest (what-
  ever  the  name  actually  means}  was  the  'north-gate  in  the  Rammas'
  (RK p. 111) is made  certain by  an isolated slip (19) giving  the distances,
  east of Edoras,  of the  Mering Stream  and the  seven beacons;  for here,
  following Amon Din, appears Forannest (Rammas Echor).                     
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                 
                                                                           
   l.  Sarn Gebir: the rapids in Anduin.                                 
   2.  In  the pencilled  text the  enemy camp  is near  Amon Din,  and the
       distances are greater: 245 or 250 miles to the halt  in the  Forest of
       Eilenach, 285 to Amon Din.                                           
   3.  The  distance  from  the  Rammas  to  Minas   Tirith  given   here  (12
       miles or 4 leagues)  obviously refers  to the  distance from  the city
       to  the  point  in  the  wall  where the  Rohirrim entered  (where the
       North  Road  from  Anorien  ran  into  the  townlands);  and  while in
       RK (p.  22) the  city was  four leagues  from the  wall at  the widest
       extent  of  the  Pelennor  (in  the  direction  of Osgiliath)  and the
       north  gate  in the  Rammas rather  less ('maybe  ten miles  or more',
       RK  p.  111),  my  father  had  now  abandoned  the  origina)  concep-
       tion that the Pelennor had  at all  points a  radius of  seven leagues
       (see pp. 277 - 8, 287). Cf. also the draft for  'The Siege  of Gondor'
       (p.  330)"where  it  is  said that  when Faramir  was forced  to aban-
       don  the  Causeway  Forts  he  had  '4  leagues or  more ot  open land
       to cross', i.e. across the Pelennor.                                 
         On   the   Second  Map   a  line   of  five   dots  (shown   on  the
       redrawing,   p.  434)   runs  northwest   from  Minas   Tirith.  These
       might seem  rather too  far north  of the  mountains to  represent the
       beacons; but that they do so is seen from the  fact that  the distance
       measured in a direct  line from  Edoras to  that nearest  Minas Tirith
       is  270  miles, to  the next  245 miles,  and to  the next  218 miles.
       These are virtually the same as  the distances  given here  for Edoras
       to  Amon  Din,  Min  Rimmon,  and  Eilenach.  On  the  other  hand the
       distance  on  the  Second  Map  from  Edoras  to  the Rammas  is about
       285 miles, and to Minas Tirith about 295.                            
   4.  My  references  to  and  citations   from  the   overwritten  pencilled
       texts,  here  and  subsequently, are  very largely  based on  the work
       done on them by Taum Santoski.                                       
   5.  In  the  following text  of this  passage the  distance from  Edoras to
       Minas  Tirith  becomes  'a  hundred  and  one  leagues',   changed  at
       once  to  'a  hundred  leagues  and  two',  as in  RK. On  my father's
       large-scale  map  of  Rohan,  Gondor  and  Mordor  the  distance  in a

       
                                                                    
 direct line  is 302  miles, but  he noted  against a  pencilled line
 connecting   them  304   .  -   On  the   form  Mundbeorg   hill  of
 protection' for Mundburg in LR see VII.449 note 7.                  
6.   Cyneferth  has  the  very  common  Old  English  name-element  cyne-
 'royal';  Grimhelm  means  'visored  helm',  cf. grima  'mask', the
 name of Wormtongue.                                                 
7.   On  a torn half-sheet, subsequently  used for  other writing  on the
 reverse, are the remains of  a time-scheme  which is  very difficult
 both to read and to place in sequence,  especially since  some dates
 are lost and can only be deduced from those that are left.  It seems
 that  Theoden  here  remains  a  whole   day  at   Dunharrow  before
 setting out on the 10th of March, and  on the  11th, after  news has
 come  in  of  an  Orc-host  entering  Rohan from  north of  the Emyn
 Muil,  Eomer  leaves  the host,  rejoining it  on the  12th. Against
 March  10 (?)  is written:  'Merry insists  on going  to war  and is
 taken  up  by  [Grim  >]  Dunhere  who rides  with the  King, Eowyn,
 and Eomer.' It is hard to know what to make  of this.  A possibility
 is that my father had briefly decided  to abandon  the story  of the
 'young  rider  of  the  guard'  (Eowyn),  for  Eowyn  will  now come
 openly to Minas  Tirith, while  Merry, equally  openly, is  taken by
 Dunhere,  chief  of the  men of  Harrowdale. In  support of  this is
 the  abandoned  name   Grim-  (for   Grimhelm?),  and   perhaps  the
 underlining  of  Eowyn.  But  this  seems to  me very  unlikely. It
 seems more probable that this text represents earlier ideas for this
 element in the story: not  only is  Merry permitted  to go  with the
 host, but Eowyn  rides also  as a  matter of  course (in  which case
 the  name Grim-  is without  significance, for  Grimhelm had  not yet
 arisen). In support of this  is the  diversion of  Eomer northwards,
 mentioned  in  several of  the early  outlines for  Book V,  but not
 subsequently.                                                       
8.   This  text was  in fact  'doubled', pencil  overwritten in  ink; but
 much  of  the  pencilled  form  was  left  clear,  and  it  shows no
 significant difference from the version in ink.                     
9.   In this  first finished  version of  From dark  Dunharrow in  the dim
 morning line 2 reads (as also  in the  first workings)  fate defying
 rode Fengel's son, alliterating on f, with Thengel? in pencil in the
 margin  (with  thane  and  captain  rode  Thengel's  son,  RK). Both
 fengel  and  pengel  were  Old  English  poetic  words   for  'king,
 prince',  and  since  Thengel  as  the  name  of   Theoden's  father
 appears in earIy texts of  'The Riders  of Rohan'  and 'The  King of
 the  Golden  Hall'  (VII.399,  402,  441)  the appearance  of Fengel
 here may have been inadvertent.                                     
  Line  8  reads  where  deep  once  he  drank  ere   darkness  fell,
 changed to where long he had lived ere the light  faded. In  line 10
 faith  compelled him  preceded Fealty  kept he.  Line 12,  where the
 original  workings  had  five  days  and  nights,  changed  to  four

       nights and days, retains  the latter  (five in  RK). Line  14 reads
       through Folde and Fenmarch past  Firienlode: Firienlode  is clearly
       a river, and so  perhaps the  original name  of the  Mering Stream,
       which flowed through the Firien Wood.  In line  16 Minas  Tirith is
       Mundberg(see note  5; berg  and beorg,  'hill, mountain',  were Old
       English variants).                                                 
  10.  This text still has  Four nights  and days  for Five,  and Mundberg
       for Mundburg (see note 9).                                         
  11.  This was  subsequently altered  on the  manuscript. I  presume that
       my  father's  thought  was  that  for  Eowyn to  be disguised  as a
       member  of  the  king's  own  guard,  and  distinct  among  them by
       slightness  of  build,  would  obviously  make  her  presence  more
       readily detected; but see p. 369.                                  
  12.  Cf. the note at the end of outline A  (p. 344):  Camp just  west of
       Min  Rimmon  on night  of 12th'.  - The  phrase 'bivouacked  in the
       pinewoods  that  clustered  about  (Minrimmon  Beacon)'  was  first
       used of the Halifirien (p. 347). In the final form it would be used
       of  Eilenach,  when  that  became  again   the  sixth   beacon  (RK
       p. 104).                                                           
  13.  The name Eothain now  appears in  a third  application (see  p. 247
       and note 20), for this Eothain, captain of the guard, can hardly be
       the same  Rider as  Eomer's squire  in 'The  Riders of  Rohan' (see
       p. 266 note 20).                                                   
  14.  The  appearance  and  clothing  of   Ghan-buri-Ghan  are   not  de-
       scribed:  'There sat  Theoden and  Eomer and  before [them]  on the
       ground  was a  strange squat  shape of  a man.  Merry felt  that he
       had  seen  him  before,  and suddenly  he remembered:  the Pukelmen
       of Dunharrow.  Almost it  seemed that  here was  one come  to life.
       Looking about he saw that in a ring just outside the light squatted
       other  similar figures,  while Riders  on guard  stood in  a circle
       behind.'  Ghan-buri-Ghan   'spoke  after   a  fashion   the  Common
       Speech as it was in Gondor.' At the point where this draft  ends he
       replies  to the  king's offer  of reward  and friendship  thus: 'No
       need.  Ghan-buri-Ghan  himself  go  with you  [?lord]. If  he leads
       into trap you will kill him. If he lead well  then we  say farewell
       and ask only to be left in the woods.'                             
  15.  Whereas  on  the  large  map  the  Anduin  bends   southward  after
       Cair Andros and is running  north-south at  Osgiliath, on  this map
       it  continues  south-east after  Cair Andros  and then  swings back
       south-west  to  Osgiliath. No  features are  shown here  other than
       the course of the River itself.                                    
  16.  The fair copy was here written over a pencilled text. Most  of this
       Taum Santoski has been able to read, and it is seen that  the final
       text was already closely approached.                               
  17.  After  'The  first  eored drew  up behind  him [Theoden]  and about
       him on either side  (RK p.  111) this  text continues:  Elfhelm was

                                                               
                                                                     
 away  on  the  right  ...': thus  the words  'Dernhelm kept  close to
 the  king,  though  {Elfhelm's company  was away  on the  right)' are
 lacking. This implies  that the  story was  still present  that Dern-
 helm  rode  as  a  member  of  the  leading  eored  with  the  king's
 household-men  (RK  p.  110),  not  as  one  of   Elfhelm's  company;
 see p. 353.                                                          
18.   Rejected  forms  in  these  notes  are  fornest,  Anfornest, together
 with  words  nesta,  nethra,  nest,  the  last with  meanings (appar-
 ently: the writing is very obscure) 'heart, core'.                   
19.   The reverse of this  slip (which  is the  lower half  of a  torn page)
 carries the following text:                                          
   ... war would be useless, disastrous .........     .. something
   much simpler, smaller and more desperate.                          
      'I see you have  something in  mind,' said  Thorin. 'What  is it?'
      'Well,  this  first,' I  answered: 'you  will have  to go  on your
   quest  secretly,  and  that  means  you  must go  yourself, without
   messengers  or  embassies,  and  go  with   only  a   few  faithful
   kinsmen   or   followers  of   your  house.   But  you   will  need
   something more. There is a piece missing from the plan.            
                                                                     
   For  I  needed  thought. Thorin's  tale had  roused memories  in my
   mind.  Many  years  before  I  had  been  to  Dol  Guldur,  as  you
   know.  You  will  know  what   I  mean   since  you   know  Bilbo's
   story. I  remembered the  unhappy dying  dwarf in  the pits  of Dol
   Guldur  and  the  torn map  and  old  key.  Except  that he  was of
   Durin's  folk  of  Erebor (as  the map  showed) I  had no  idea who
   he  was.  Of  some  importance  perhaps  since  he  was  bearing  a
   Ring,  though  he  might  have  come  by  it  in  many  ways.  None
   but  the  Dwarves,  and  only  a  few  of them,  know who  were the
   possessors  of  their  great  rings.  But  l  had  other  far  more
   perilous  business on  hand, and  after I  escaped from  Dol Guldur
   many  urgent  cares.  I stowed  the things  away till  perhaps time
   would  show  their  meaning.  Now  it  had  done so.  I saw  that I
   [had]  heard the  last wandering  words of  Thrain II  Thror's son,
   though  he  could  not speak  his own  name or  his son's.  By what
   toughness of resistance he had  kept these  small things  hidden in
   his torments, I do not know. But I think that                      
 Comparison  with  The  Quest  of  Erebor   in  Unfinished  Tales  will
 show that  these passages  are the  forerunners of  two in  that (see
 p  332  for  the  first,  p.  324  for the  second). My  father said
 (Unfinished  Tales  p.  11)  that  this  account  of Gandalf's  'was to
 have   come   in   during  a   looking-back  conversation   in  Minas
 Tirith';  the present  text may  perhaps be  assigned therefore  to a
 time when  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  was approaching  completion, if
 not  actually finished;  and this  is supported  by the  reference to
 Thrain II (see VII.160}. Since  the notes  on distances  are obviously

  a  secondary  use  of  the  page,  it  would  follow that  the name
  Forannest  was  not  abandoned,  but  was  merely  not used  in the
  published work.                                                   
    It is  strange that  Gandalf says  here of  the unknown  Dwarf in
  Dol Guldur that he  was 'of  some importance  perhaps since  he was
  bearing a Ring, though he might  have come  by it  in many  ways' -
  and  the  following  sentence  'None  but the  Dwarves, and  only a
  few of them, know  who were  the possessors  of their  great rings'
  must imply that it was one of the Seven Rings  of the  Dwarves. But
  the story that Thrain's  ring was  taken from  him in  the dungeons
  of Sauron  goes back  to the  earliest sketch  for 'The  Council of
  Elrond': 'But Thrain of old had one that descended from  his sires.
  We  do  not  now  know  where  it is.  We think  it was  taken from
  him, ere you found him in the  dungeons long  ago' (VI.398).  It is
  surely incredible that at this stage my  father should  have enter-
  tained the idea that Thrain had managed to retain  his ring  in Dol
  Guldur. I can only suppose therefore,  though it  is not  a natural
  interpretation of the words 'he was bearing a Ring', that  he meant
  that Thrain told Gandalf that he bad been the bearer of one  of the
  Seven Rings of the Dwarves - even though  he was  so far  gone that
  'he could not speak his own name or his son's.'  In the  later form
  of this passage in  The Quest  of Erebor  Gandalf did  not discover
  in Dol  Guldur who  the Dwarf  was, yet  he did  learn that  he had
  been the possessor of a great Ring: 'Nearly all his ravings were of
  that. The last of the Seven he said over and over again.'          

                                  VIII.                                
                                                                        
                          THE STORY FORESEEN FROM.                       
                                 FORANNEST.                              
                                                                        
 I  have  called  this outline  'The Story  Foreseen from  Forannest' (the
 north gate of the Pelennor Wall) because it takes up at the point  in the
 narrative  where  the  Rohirrim  poured  through  the  outwalls  of Minas
 Tirith in that place. But it will be seen  that a  part was  foreseen for
 Denethor  in  no  way  consonant  with  the  story  of  his  madness  and
 suicide, and this  outline must  come therefore  from before  the writing
 of at any rate the latter part of 'The  Siege of  Gondor', in  which that
 gory entered as the original draft was in progress (pp. 335 - 6).       
   A briefer, rougher form  of this  outline is  found, extending  only as
 far as the coming  of the  Host of  the West  before the  Morannon. This
 my  father rejected  immediately and  began on  the fuller  outline given
 here. A few differences in the first form are given in the notes.        
   The  second  form  of  the  outline  was  given  a   heading  'Gandalf,
 Rohan, and Aragorn'; this was added to the text subsequently.           
                                                                        
 15 [March]. Horns of Rohan heard in the morning. Great
 charge of the Rohirrim through breach in north of Ramas-
 Coren. Rohirrim reach field before Great Gate, and men of
 Minas Tirith throw out enemy. But Wizard King takes to air
 and becomes Nazgul,(1) rallies host of Morghul, and assails king.
 Theoden falls from horse sorely wounded; he is saved by Merry
 and Eowyn, but sortie from Gate does not reach them in time,
 before Eowyn is slain.(2) Grief and wrath of Eomer.
   Eomer leads Rohirrim in a second reckless charge; but at that
 moment there is a cry from the city. A black fleet is seen coming
 to Haramon.(3) Men are landing. Then as final despair comes on,
 and Rohirrim give back, [west o] south wind rolls back cloud,
 and noon-sun gleams through. Aragorn unfurls his great stan-
 dard from ship-top. The crown and stars of Sun and Moon
 shine out.(4) Men cry that Elendil has come back to life or
 Nume,...(5)
   Eomer charges again and the enemy is routed and so Eomer
 and Aragorn meet again on the field 'though all the hosts of
 Mordor lay between'.(6)

                     
                                                                 
    By evening of 15th [in pencil > 14] in  a bloodred  sun victory
 is  complete.  All  enemy  is  driven  into  or back  over Anduin.
 Aragorn sets up his pavilion and standard  outside gate,  but will
 not enter city,  yet. Denethor  comes down  to greet  the victors.
 Theoden  dies.  He bids  farewell to  Gandalf, Aragorn,  Eomer and
 Merry. Theoden and Eowyn laid for a time in the royal tombs.     
    Words  of  Aragorn  and  Denethor.  Denethor  will   not  yield
 Stewardship, yet: not until war  is won  or lost  and all  is made
 clear.  He  is  cold and  suspicious and?  mock-courteous. Aragorn
 grave and silent. But  Denethor says  that belike  the Stewardship
 will run out anyway, since he seems  like to  lose both  his sons.
 Faramir is sick of his  wounds. If  he dies  then Gondor  can take
 what new lord it likes. Aragorn says  he will  not be  'taken', he
 will take, but asks  to see  Faramir. Faramir  is brought  out and
 Aragorn  tends  him  all  that  night,  and  love  springs between
 them.(7)                                                         
    Aragorn   and   Gandalf   counsel  immediate   action.  Gandalf
 does  not  hope  to  conquer  Mordor or  overthrow Sauron  and his
 tower.  'Not  in these  latter days,  nor ever  again by  force of
 arms.'  Yet  arms  have  their  place;  and  sloth  now  might  be
 ruinous. Gandalf advises at  least the  taking and  destruction of
 Minas Morghul.(8)                                                
    [N.B. Sauron already  troubled by  news of  the victory  of the
 Ents on March 11th - Ents another detail left out  of his  plans -
 first hears of Frodo  on 15  of March,  and at  the same  time, by
 Nazgul,  of  the  defeat in  Pelennor and  the coming  of Aragorn.
 He  is wrathful  and afraid,  but puzzled,  especially by  news of
 Frodo.  He  sends the  Nazgul to  Kirith Ungol  to get  Frodo, but
 thinks chiefly of his war, and suspecting that Gondor  will follow
 up  victory  he  plans  a  counter-attack  and  withdraws  all his
 forces to Morannon and Kirith Gorgor.]                           
    The  hosts,  as  many  as  are  unhurt,  of  Rohan  and Gondor,
 with  Rangers,  set  out  on  16th  [in  pencil  >  17]  and cross
 Anduin,  and  find  Osgiliath  empty.  On   17th  they   march  on
 Minas Morghul and the van (Riders of Rohan and Rangers and       
 Gandalf) reach it on 18th [in pencil >  19] noon  and find  it dark
 and  deserted.  They  burn  the  fields  and  Gandalf  destroys  its
 magic.(9) They  now  plan  to  march  on  the  Morannon. A  guard is
 set  on  Road,  lest  an  army come  up from  South, or  Sauron lets
 any sortie out through Kirith  Ungol (no  very great  force could
 come  that way  in a  hurry). They  have now,  however, to  go more
 slow, and keep all their host together, moving only at the speed

                              
                                                                  
 of infantry. The  footmen come  up on  19th. On  20th they  set out
 for  Morannon  (120  [in  pencil  )  100]  miles  by  road).  They
 march  through  empty  lands  unassailed  20, 21,  22, 23,  24 and
 reach  Morannon  -  just  as  Frodo  [is  beginning  the  ascent  of
 Orodruin  >  is  crossing  Kirith Gorgor  >] draws  near Orodruin.
 There  they  to  joy  and  surprise  are joined  by Ents,  with new
 forces (out of North, including Elves of Lorien).                 
  [Ents  had  victory  on 11  March. It  appears that  Treebeard was
 told by Eagles sent by Galadriel of the assault  on Lorien  and the
 crossing  of  host  to  the  Wold  of  Rohan  on  7th.  Treebeard and
 many  Ents  set  out  at  once  at  great speed  and cover  over 200
 miles,  coming  down  on  the  enemy  camp  at  south end  of Downs
 in  Eastemnet  on  11  March;  they destroyed  many and  drove rest
 in rout  back over  Anduin, where  they had  made bridges  of boats
 above  Sarn  Gebir  (about  where  Legolas  shot  down   Nazgul)  -
 but in too great disarray to destroy the  pontoons. So  Ents cross.
 Treebeard  is  here  joined  by  Elves of  Lorien. They  pursue the
 enemy  round  north  and  east  of  Emyn  Muil  and  come  down  on
 the  Hard  of  Dagor-lad  (300  miles  and  more  from  Down-end to
 Morannon by this  route): they  move swiftly  but mostly  at night,
 for  away  here  the  Darkness  is  not  over  sky,  only  a  great
 blackness  is  seen  in  the  South,  exrending  in   breadth  from
 Rauros to Linhir.(10) They arrive at same time as Gandalf.]          
  Now   follows   the   Parley   [added:   on  25th].   Aragorn  and
 Eomer   wind  horns   before  the   Morannon,  and   summon  Sauron
 to  come  forth.  There  is  no  answer  at  first, but  Sauron had
 already laid his plans  and an  embassy was  already coming  to the
 -Slack  Gare.  The  Wizard  King?  He  bears  the Mithril  coat and
 says  that  Sauron  has  already  captured   the  messenger (11) - a
 hobbit.  How   does  Sauron   know?  He   would  of   course  guess
 from Gollum's previous  visits that  a small  messenger might  be a
 hobbit. But it is probable that either Frodo talked in  his drugged
 sleep  -  not of  the Ring,  but of  his name  and country;  and that
 Gorbag  had  sent  tidings.  The  messenger  jeers  at  Gandalf for
 sending a weak  spy into  the land  where he  dare not  go himself,
 since  his  wizardry is  no match  for the  Master. Now  Sauron has
 the  messenger,  and  what  happens  to  him  depends   on  Gandalf
 and  Aragorn.  He  sees their  faces blench.  And jeers  again. So!
 he says -  he was  dear to  you, or  his errand  was vital?  So much
 the worse  for  you.  For  he  shall endure  slow torment  of years,
 and  then  be  released  when  broken,  unless you  accept Sauron*s
 terms.'                                                            

                                                        
                                                                    
      'Name  the terms,'  said Gandalf,  and tears  were in  his eyes,
  and all thought  he was  defeated and  would yield  - and  of course
  be cheated.                                                        
      The  terms  are  that  the  Hosts  of  Gondor  and  Rohan  shall
  withdraw  at  once  beyond  Anduin. All  land east  of Anduin  to be
  Sauron's  for  ever,  solely;  and west  of Anduin  as far  as Misty
  Mountains  shall  be  tributary  to  Mordor  and   swear  vassalage:
  Gondor and Rohan:  as far  as the  river Isen.  The Ents  shall help
  rebuild  Isengard  and be  subject to  its lord  - not  Saruman, but
  one more trustworthy!                                              
      Gandalf  replies,  'Yea,  and  what surety  have we  that Sauron
  will keep  his part?  Let him  yield first  the prisoner.'  (That is
  awkward  for  the  ambassador  as in  fact Sauron  has not  got him!
  But he laughs.) 'Take it or leave it so,' he said.                 
      'We will take it,' said Gandalf,  ' -  this the  mithril-coat in
  memory.  But  as  for  your  terms we  reject them  utterly.' Horror
  of  Pippin  and  Merry if  they are  present? 'For  in any  case you
  would not keep them. Do as  you will.  And let  fear eat  your heart
  - for if you so much as set a thorn in the flesh of Frodo  you shall
  rue  it.'  The  ambassador  laughs,  and   gives  a   dreadful  cry.
  Flinging off  his garments  he vanishes;  but at  that cry  the host
  prepared  in  ambush  sally  from  the  mountains  on  either  side,
  and  from  the  Teeth,  and  pour  out  of  the  Gate.  The  host of
  Gondor  taken  at  unawares  wavers,  and   the  leaders   are  sur-
  rounded.  [Added  in  pencil:  All   the  Nine   Nazgul  remounted (12)
  swoop down; but the Eagles come to give battle.]                   
      At  that  moment (25th)  the Ring  goes into  Crack of  Doom and
  the  mountain  vomits,  and  Baraddur crashes,  and all  things done
  by  Sauron  are  cast  down,  the  Black  Gates  fall.  The  Host of
  Mordor  is  dismayed,  and  flees  back   for  refuge   into  Kirith
  Gorgor.  The  victorious  host  of  Gondor  and  Rohan  pours  in in
  pursuit,                                                           
      [Remainder of the text is  in pencil:]  Gandalf knows  that Ring
  must  have  reached  fire.  Suddenly  Sauron  is  aware of  the Ring
  and its peril. He sees Frodo afar off. In  a last  desperate attempt
  he  turns  his  thought  from  the  Battle  (so  that his  men waver
  again  and  are  pressed  back)  and  tries to  stop Frodo.  At same
  time  he  sends  the  Wizard  King  as   Nazgul (13) to   the  Mountain.
  The  whole  plot is  clear to  him. ?  He blasts  the Stone  so that
  at   that  moment   the  Orthanc-stone   explodes:  it   would  have
  killed Aragorn had he had it in hand?                              
      Gandalf bids Gwaihir fly swiftly to Orodruin.                  

                                  
                                                                        
 This  account  of  the  Parley  before  the  Black  Gate may  be compared
 with that in the outline  'The Story  Foreseen from  Fangorn', written
 years before (pp. 229 - 30).
  As I have said, this text certainly preceded at any rate the latter part
 of 'The Siege of Gondor', in view of what is told  here of  Denethor. On
 the other hand, it equally clearly followed the  initial drafting  of 'The
 Ride of the Rohirrim', since the Ents here crossed  the Anduin  north of
 the Emyn  Muil  after  their  victory  in  the  Wold  of Rohan  and came
 south  to  the  Morannon  through the  lands east  of the  River: their
 apperance  in  Anorien  had  already  been  rejected.(14) While   I  have
 necessarily treated these chapters as  separate narrative  entities, whose
 development  from  initial  draft  to   virtually  final   form  proceeded
 out interruption, I think it  is in  fact very  probable that  my father
 moved back and forth between them.                                     

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
  1. But  Wizard  King  takes  to  air  and  becomes  Nazgul.  These  words
     can  only  mean that  Nazgul refers  specifically to  the Ring-wraiths
     as   borne   upon  'winged   steeds'.  But   my  father   cannot  have
     intended this. I presume that since in this  part of  The Lord  of the
     Rings   the   Ringwraiths   were   'winged',   and  their   power  and
     significance  for  the  story  lies  in their  being 'winged',  he had
     nonetheless  made  this  equation,  and  so  slipped into  saying that
     when  the  Black  Captain  (Lord  of  the  Nazgul) himself  mounted on
     one  of  the  monstrous  birds  he  'became  a  Nazgul'.  This  occurs
     again at the end of the outline.                                     
  2. On the death of Eowyn see p. 318.                                    
  3. At the equivalent point in the first form  of the  outline there  is a
     note  in  the  margin:  Pelennor  wall  here  only  10 miles  away and
     the  wall  right  above  stream  which  bends   round  the   Hills  of
     Haramon.'   Haramon,  the   original  name   of  Emyn   Arnen,  appears
     on the Second Map: see pp. 353; 434, 438.                            
  4. The  first  form  of  the  outline  has:   'Sungleam  shines   on  the
     [Tree >) Crown and stars of Sun and Moon.'                           
  5. The first four letters of this name are certain,  but it  can scarcely
     be Numenor; the likeliest interpretation is Numerion.               
  6. The  first  form of  the outline  has here:  'Enemy is  caught between
     Aragorn   and   the   Dunedain   and   Eomer   and   so    Eomer   and
     Aragorn  meet.'  This  is  the first  time that  the name  Dunedain is
     met with ab initio in the texts.                                     
  7. Of  this  passage,  from 'Aragorn  sets up  his pavilion  and standard
     outside gate', there is very little in the first form of  the outline:
     'Denethor  comes  down  to  welcome  Aragorn;   but  will   not  yield
     the  Stewardship,  until  all  is  proven  and  war  is  lost  or won.

     Aragorn  agrees.'  Then  follows:  'Aragorn  and   Gandalf  counsel
     immediate action.'                                                
  8. This passage is the first germ of 'The Last Debate'.              
  9. The first form of the outline has 'They burn the  poisoned fields';
     and distances are given: Minas Tirith to  Osgiliath 26  miles. West
     edge  of  Osgiliath to  Minas Morghul  [50 >]  60 miles?'  (with 55
     written above 60).                                                
 10. This is the first reference to Linhir (see pp. 436 - 7).          
 11. It is curious and  confusing that  Sauron's messenger  should refer
     to Frodo as a 'messenger'.                                        
 12. Earlier  in  this  outline  my  father  had questioned  whether the
     ambassador  was  not  in  fact  the  Wizard  King  himself,  and he
     appears again at  the end,  dispatched by  Sauron to  Orodruin (his
     fate on the fields of the  Pelennor was  therefore not  yet finally
     decided). Since at the end of the parley  the ambassador  casts off
     his garments and vanishes, he was certainly  a Ringwraith;  is this
     the meaning of 'All the Nine Nazgul remounted'?                   
 13. On the implication of he  sends the  Wizard King  as Nazgul  - that
     Nazgul  means  specifically  the winged  Wraiths -  see note  l. On
     the other hand,  All the  Nine Nazgul  remounted (note  12) carries
     the opposite implication.                                         
 14. It cannot be actually demonstrated that the story of the  coming of
     Treebeard and the Ents to  Anorien did  not follow,  and supersede,
     their  appearance  at  the  Black  Gate;  but this  seems extremely
     improbable.                                                       

                                    IX.                                  
                                                                        
                             THE BATTLE OF THE                           
                              PELENNOR FIELDS.                           
                                                                        
 I give first a remarkable writing entitled Fall of  Theoden in  the Battle
 of Osgiliath. It is clearly written in ink, with only a few  changes made
 at  the  time  of writing;  there are  also a  small number  of pencilled
 corrections, which I show as such.                                      
                                                                        
    Then   Theoden   gave   a   great   shout   'Forth   Eorlingas!'   and
 spurred  Snowmane   rearing  into   the  deeps   of  the   great  shadow.
 But  few  followed  him;  for  his  men  quailed  and  grew sick  in that
 ghastly  shade,  and  many  fell  upon  the  ground.  The  light  of  his
 golden  shield  grew  dim.  Still  he  rode  on,  and  darts  flew  thick
 about   him.   Many   fell   before   his  spear,   and  almost   he  had
 reached   to   the   standard   of  the   Haradoth  [)   Haradhoth],  when
 suddenly  he   gave  a   great  cry,   and  fell.   A  black   arrow  had
 pierced   his   heart.  And   at  the   same  moment   Snowmane  stumbled
 forward  and  lay  still.   The  great   shadow  descended.   Slowly  the
 huge  vulture-form  [>  Slowly  as  a  settling  cloud  it]   came  down,
 lifted  its  wings,  and  with  a  hoarse  croaking  cry settled  upon the
 body  of  the  fallen  king,  digging  in  its  talons  and  stooping its
 long  [added:  naked]  neck.  Upon  its  back  there  sat a  shape. Black
 robed  it  was,  and  above  the  robe  there  was  a steel  crown, borne
 by  no  visible   head  save   where  between   crown  and   cloak  there
 was a pale and deadly gleam as it were of eyes.(1) But Theoden          
 was not alone. One had followed him: Eowyn daughter of                 
 Eomund, and all had feared the light of her face, shunning her          
 as night fowl turn from the day. Now she leapt from her horse         
 and stood before the shadow; her sword was in her hand.                 
    'Come  not between  the Nazgul  and his  prey,' said  a cold         
 voice, 'or he will bear thee away to the houses of lamentation,         
 beyond all darkness  where thy  flesh shall  be devoured  and thy         
 shrivelled mind be left naked.'                                          
    She stood still and  did not  blench. 'I  do not  fear thee,         
 Shadow,' she said. 'Nor him that devoured thee.  Go back  to him         
 and report  that  his shadows  and dwimor-lakes (2) are powerless         
 even to frighten women.' The  great bird  flapped its  wings and         
 leapt  into  the  air,  leaving the  king's body,  and falling  upon her

                                                         
                                                                              
   with beak and claw. Like a shaft  of searing  light a  pale sword           
   cold as ice was raised above her head.                                      
         She raised her shield, and with a  swift and  sudden stroke           
   smote  off the  bird's head.  It fell,  its vast  wings outspread           
   crumpled  and helpless  on the  earth. About  Eowyn the  light of           
   day fell bright and clear. With a clamour of dismay the  hosts of           
   Harad  turned  and  fled, and  over the  ground a  headless thing           
   crawled away, snarling and snivelling, tearing at the cloak. Soon           
   the black cloak too lay formless and still, and a long  thin wail           
   rent the air and vanished in the distance.                                  
         Eowyn stepped to the king. Alas, Theoden son of  Thengel,'(3)         
   she said. 'But you have turned the tide. See, they fly. The enemy           
   is broken by fear. Never did an old Lord of  Men die  better. You           
   shall sleep well, and no Shadow nor foul thing assail your bed.'            
         Then there was a sound of a great ...(4) and the men of Minas           
   Tirith and of the  Mark released  from the  Shadow swept  up, the           
   light reborn was strong on  their swords  and spears.  They drove           
   the enemy into the River. Some stayed by their king.                        
                                                                              
         I think that my father  wrote this  well before  the period  of compo-
   sition  we  have  now  reached,  and  I  would be  inclined to  associate it
   (very  tentatively)  with  the  outline  sketches  for  Book  V,  where  the
   event described here is several times referred to, and especially with      
   Outlines 111  and V.  In these,  in contrast  to what  is said  in I  and II
   (p.  256),  there  is  no mention  of Eowyn's  wounding or  death: 'Theoden,
   and  Eowyn  destroy  Nazgul  and  Theoden  falls'  (111,  p.  260); 'Theoden
   is  slain  by  Nazgul;  but  he  is unhorsed  and the  enemy is  routed' (V,
   p.  263).  Although  in  my  father's  narrative sketches  silence is  a bad
   guide, it  is possible  that these  brief statements  are nonetheless  to be
   associated with what is  certainly a  notable feature  of the  present text,
   that  there  is  no  suggestion  that  Eowyn  was  in  any  way hurt  in the
   encounter  with  the  Lord  of  the  Nazgul  or  after  (while  Theoden  is'
   felled and dies without speaking). A difficulty with this view is that in
   Outline  V  the  Nazgul  King  is  'unhorsed',  whereas  in  'The   Fall  of
   Theoden  in  the  Battle  of  Osgiliath'  his  descent  on a  'huge vulture-
   form' is at the centre of the story. Since the 'vultures' are referred to as
   'winged steeds', it is possible that the  word 'unhorsed'  was used  in this
   sense, though that does not seem very likely.                               
         It is obvious that no part was foreseen for Merry in the  great event;
   and it seems that (in  strong contrast  to the  final story,  RK p.  117) it
   was the beheading of the great  bird that  in itself  caused the  defeat and
   flight of the Lord of the Nazgul, deprived of his steed.                    
         Whatever its relative dating, the piece certainly gives  an impression
   of  having  been  composed  in  isolation,  a  draft  for  a  scene  that my

                             
                                                                            
 father  saw  vividly  before  he  reached this  point in  the actual  writing of
 the story.  When  he  did  so,  he  evidently  had  it   before  him,   as  is
 suggested by the words of the Lord of the Nazgul (cf. RK p. 116).         
                                                                            
 When  my  father  came  to  write  the  story  of the  Battle of  the Pelennor
 Fields he all  but achieved  the form  in which  it stands  in The  Return of
 the  King in  a single  manuscript ('A').  He adopted  here the  method of
 building up   the   completed  narrative   through  massive   correction  and
 interpolation of his initial text; and  the greater  part if  not all  of this
 work  clearly  belongs  to  the  same  time.  Beneath the  writing in  ink on
 the first page  of this  manuscript there  is however  a pencilled  text, and
 bears   further   on   the   subject  of   Theoden  and   the  Lord   of  the
 Nazgul.                                                                     
  This  underlying  text  is  largely   illegible  on   account  of   the  ink
 overwriting,  which  is  closely-packed,  but  from  what  can  be   seen  it
 seems  not  to  have  differed   greatly  (the   opening  paragraph   of  the
 chapter, mostly legible, is very close to the ink version  on top  of it)  - as
 far  as  the  passage  where  the  golden  shield   of  Theoden   is  dimmed,
 horses  reared  and  screamed,  and   men  falling   from  their   horses  lay
 upon the ground. But then follows: 'And through the ranks of the        
  enemy a wide lane opened.' The rest of the pencilled text is almost        
  entirely  lost,  but  isolated  words and  phrases can  be made  out: 'There
  came  riding  .....  a  great  .....  [struck  out: The  Black Captain)
  .....   stood  .....   the  Black   Captain  robed   .....  and   above  the
  robes  was  a  crown  .....  '  This  can scarcely  mean anything  other than
  that  the  Lord  of  the  Nazgul  did  not  descend  upon  the  battle borne
  upon the back of a great vulture.                                          
   Various  statements  have  been  made  on  this  subject,   beginning  with
  that  in Outline  V, cited  above, that  the Nazgul  was 'unhorsed'.  In the
  rough  draft  of  'The  Siege  of  Gondor' (p.  331) Gandalf,  speaking to
  Pippin  of  the  Wizard King,  says that  'he has  not [struck  out(?): yet]
  taken  to  winged  steeds';  in  the  outline   'The  Story   Foreseen  from
  Forannest'  (p.  359)  'the  Wizard  King  takes  to  the  air  and  becomes
  Nazgul'; and of course  there is  the evidence  of 'The  Fall of  Theoden in
  the Battle  of  Osgiliath'.  That  my  father  should  at  this  stage  have
  abandoned,  however  briefly,  the  story  of  the  Winged  Nazgul  descend-
  ing  upon  Theoden  is  certainly  surprising;  but it  seems plain  that he
  did so.
    The first manuscript A has no title, and was paginated continuously
  with 'The Ride of the Rohirrim'; a subsequent fair copy manuscript
  ('B') was afterwards given the number and title 'XLVIII The Battle
  of the Pelennor Fields'. The opening passage in A is distinct from the
  form in RK:
                                                                            
   But it was no orc-chief or brigand that led the assault on                
  Gondor. Who knows whether his Master himself had set a date                

 to the darkness, designing the fall of the City for that very hour          
 and needing light for the hunting of those  that fled,  or fortune          
 had  betrayed  him  and  the  world turned  against him?  None can          
 tell. Dismayed he may  have been,  cheated of  victory even  as he          
 grasped  it. Cheated,  not yet  robbed. He  was still  in command,          
 wielding  great   power,  Lord   of  the   Nazgul.  He   had  many          
 weapons. He left the Gates and vanished.                                    
                                                                            
   There  is  no   mention  of   Dernhelm  in   the  passage   'He  [Theoden]
 slackened  his  speed  a  little,  seeking  new foes,  and his  knights came
 behind him. Elfhelm's men were among the siege-engines ...', where          
 RK  has  'and  his   knights  came   about  him,   and  Dernhelm   was  with
 them.'  This  shows,  I  think, that  Dernhelm was  still conceived  to have
 been  riding  with  the  king's  knights  throughout  the  journey   from  '
 Edoras.(5)                                                                  
   When  the  Lord  of  the  Nazgul  says   to  Eowyn (6) No  living   man  may
 hinder me!' she replies,  as the  text was  first written:  'I am  no living
 man.  You  look  upon  a  woman.   Eowyn  I   am,  Eomund's   daughter.  You
 stand  between  me  and  my  kin.  Begone!  For  though  I  have   slain  no
 living thing, yet I will slay the dead [> yet I will slay the Undead].' This
 rests on the earlier form of the prophecy concerning the Lord of the        
 Nazgul:  'he is  not doomed  to fall  before men  of war  or wisdom;  but in
 the hour of his victory  to be  overthrown by  one who  has slain  no living
 thing'  (pp.  334-5).  This  was  changed  on  the  manuscript  to: 'Begone,
 if  thou  be not  deathless! For  living or  dark undead,  I will  hew thee,
 if thou touch me.'                                                          
   In  the  passage  that  follows,  Eowyn's  hair  is  described  as  'shorn
 upon her neck', and this survived  through the  fair copy  8 into  the first
 typescript,  where  it  was  changed  to the  reading of  RK (p.  116): 'her
 bright  hair,  released  from its  bonds'. And  Merry's thought  is directly
 reported:  'I  must  do  something.  If  only  I  can  get  away  from those
 eyes! '                                                                     
   After  the  great  cry  of the  Lord of  the Nazgul  as he  departed there
 follows:  'And  far  up  above [?the]  Nazgul hearing  that cry  were filled
 with great  terror, and  fled away  to Baraddur  bearing ill  tidings.' This
 was not taken up into the fair copy (B).(7)                                 
   At Theoden's death  the text  here is  briefer, and  no reference  is made
 to  the taking  up of  the banner  from its  dead bearer  and the  sign made
 by the king that it be given to Eomer: 'Grief and dismay fell upon          
 Eomer  as  he  leaped  from the  saddle and  stood by  the king.  Slowly the
 old man opened his eyes again. "Hail, King of the Mark!" he said....'       
 In the fair copy B the banner-bearer is named Guthwin (Guthlaf in           
 RK).                                                                        
   Of Merry s  sword it  was first  said in  this text,  So passed  the sword
 of  the  Barrow-downs,  work  of  Westernesse.  Glad  would  he   have  been
 to  know its  fate who  wrought it  slowly long  ago, for  the sorcerer-king

 he knew and the dread realm of Angmar in the ancient North, hating
 all his deeds.' The text of RK (pp. 119 - 20), 'who wrought it slowly
 long ago in the North-kingdom when the Dunedain were young
 was substituted, probably at once.(8)
   The passage (RK p. 120) recording the burying of the carcase of the
 great beast and of Snowmane, with the horse's epitaph, is absent; and
 the great rain that came from the sea ('it seemed that all things wept
 for Theoden and Eowyn', recalling the grief for Baldr) likewise, being
 added in only on the first typescript. A page of the manuscript (A) in
 which the encounter of the Prince of Dol Amroth with the bearers of
  Theoden and Eowyn is described, and his discovery that Eowyn was
  still alive, was rejected and at once rewritten; in the rejected form
  occurs this passage in the words of the Prince (still given no other
  name) with the bearers:
                                                                        
     'Bring him to the City,' he said. 'The gate is wide open, and by
   his own deed the way thither is made free.' And  then he  rose and
   looked  on  Eowyn  and  was  amazed.  'Here  is  a  woman!'  he  said.
   'Do  even  the  women  of   Rohan  come   to  war   in  our   aid?'  he
   asked.                                                                
      'It  is  the  Lady  Eowyn  sister  of King  Eomer,' they  said. 'And
   we  do  not  know  how  she  came  here,  but  it  seems that  she took
   the  place  of  one  of  his  knights.  [Rejected  at   once:  Dernhelm
   ...  a  young  kinsman  of  the  king.]  It  is  a  grief  beyond words
   to us.                                                                
                                                                        
    This is the only trace  of the  idea that  Eowyn escaped  detection by
   substituting  herself  for  a  young  Rider  among  the  king's knights
   actually  named  Dernhelm.  No doubt  it arose  here and  was abandoned
   here;  probably  because  of  the  meaning of  the name  (derne 'hidden,
   secret'; cf. the earlier  name by  which Eowyn  was to  ride, Grimhelm,
   p. 355 note 6).                                                       
    In the rewritten version of this passage  the text  of RK  is reached,
   and here at last appears the name Imrahil of the  Prince of  Dol Amroth,
   entering apparently without any hesitation as to its form.             
    Among  the  horsemen  of  Gondor  (RK  p.   121)  appears   Hurin  the
   Tall, 'Warden of the City', changed at once to 'Warden of the  Keys'. In
   an immediately rejected version of the passage in  which the  new hosts
   streaming in  from Osgiliath  are described  it was  said of  the Black
   Captain:  'He  was  gone,  and  the  Nazgul  in fear  had fled  back to
   Mordor bearing ill  tidings' (see  note 7);  but this  was lost  in the
   rewriting of the passage, where appear Gothmog lieutenant of
   Morghul,(9) the Variags of Khand (both names written without any
   precedent forms), and the black 'half-trolls' of Far Harad.(10)
     The course of Anduin, as seen by the watchmen on the walls when
   the black fleet approached (RK p. 122), was first described thus:

   For south away the river went in a knee about  the out-thrust          
 of the hills of Emyn Arnen in lower  Ithilien,(11) and Anduin bent          
 then in upon the Pelennor so that its  outwall was  there built          
 upon the brink, and that at the nearest was no more  than [five          
 >] four miles from the  Gates; [added:  and quays  and landings          
 were  made  there  for  boats  coming  upstream  from  the Out-          
 lands;] but thence the river flowed southeast for three leagues          
 and all that reach could be seen in line  by farsighted  men on          
 high. And they looking forth cried  in dismay,  for lo!  up the          
 reach of Arnen a black fleet could be seen ...                             
                                                                         
   Striking out this passage my father noted against the first part of it:
 'This is now told before in XLIV' (i.e. the  chapter 'Minas  Tirith'). He
 was referring to a  rider introduced  into the  first typescript  of that
 chapter (see p. 294 note 30) entirely recasting the  original description
 of  the  Pelennor  and  the Outlands  (pp. 278,  287) to  its form  in RK
 (p.  22),  where  the  bend  in  Anduin  about  Emyn  Arnen  appears. This
 rider was already in existence, though obviously belonging to  this phase
 of  writing,  as is  seen from  the name  Lonnath-ernin of  the landings,
 subsequently changed (presumably at this very juncture) to Harlond.      
 In the present text the passage just cited  was removed  immediately, and
 the much briefer passage as found in this place in RK (p. 122) follows in
 the manuscript, with the name Harlond.(12)                               
   The great banner of Aragorn is described in the same words as in       
 RK  (p.  123),  except that  in the  sentence 'for  they were  wrought of
 gems by Arwen daughter  of Elrond'  the italicised  words are  absent. In
 the  fair  copy  manuscript  (B)  'by  Finduilas  Elrond's  daughter'(13) was
 added in the margin, changed later to 'Arwen daughter of Elrond'.        
 Aragorn  is  named  'Elessar, Isildur's  heir'; and  when men  leapt from
 the ships to the quays 'There came  Legolas and  Gimli wielding  his axe,
 and  Halbarad  with  the  standard,  and  Elboron  and Elrohir  with stars
 on  their  brow,  and  the  dourhanded  Dunedain,  Rangers of  the North;
 and in the hand of Aragorn Branding was like a new fire kindled,         
 Narsil  reforged (14) as  deadly as  of old,  and about  his helm  there was
 a kingly crown.' Thus Elboron still survived, for Elladan (see pp.       
 297, 302), the change being made on the fair copy. Branding, for         
 Anduril,  Flame  of  the  West,  remained  until  changed  on  the  first
 typescript;  while  'about his  helm there  was a  kingly crown'  was not
 replaced by 'upon his brow was the Star  of Elendil'  until the  book was
 in proof.                                                                
   At  the end  of the  chapter as  first written  Duinhir of  Morthond is
 named among the fallen, whereas in RK it  is his  sons, 'Duilin  and his:
 brother'  (Derufin),  who  were  trampled  by  the mumakil.(15) Grimbold of
 Grimslade  is  not  named (though  he has  appeared in  'The Ride  of the
 Rohirrim'),  and  instead  the  sentence  in  which  he  is  named  in RK

                              
                                                                        
 reads: 'Neither Hirluin the Fair would return to his green  hills, nor
 Elfhelm  to  Eastfold  [written  above: Westfold],(16) nor Halbarad  to the
 Northlands, dourhanded Ranger.'
   In the  alliterative  song  'The  Mounds  of  Mundburg'  (not   yet  so
 named) there was much variation in the  recording of  those who  died in
 the Battle of the Pelennor  Fields. The  earliest complete,  though still
 very rough, form of the song reads:                                      
                                                                        
   As long after a maker (17) in Rohan said in his song:                     
                                                                        
      We heard in the hills the horns ringing,(18)                       
      of swords shining in the South kingdom:                            
      steeds went striding to the Stoningland                            
      a wind in the morning, war at sunrise.                             
      There Theoden fell, Thengling mighty,                              
      life and lordship long had he wielded                           
      hoar king and high, Harding and Crimbold,                          
      Dunhere and [Elfhelm >] Marculf, Deorwin the marshal.          
      Hirluin the fair to the hills by the sea,                          
      nor Forlong the great to the flowering vales                      
      ever of Arnach in his own country                                 
      returned in triumph, nor the tall bowman                           
      doughty Duinhir to the dark waters,                                
      meres of Morthond under mountain-shadows.                          
      Death in the morning and at day's ending                           
      lords took and lowly. Long now they sleep                          
      under grass in Gondor by the Great River.                          
      Red it ran then. Red was the sunset,                               
      the hills under heaven high snowmantled                           
      bloodred burning. Blood dyed the earth                             
      in the Field of Mundberg in the far country.                       
                                                                        
   Another rough  text, moving  nearer to  the final  form in  some lines
 but petering out before the conclusion, has in the line corresponding to
 the 8th in the version  just given  Dunhere and  [Elfhelm >] Guthwin,
 Deorwin  the marshal.  Guthwin was  the banner-bearer  of the  king (see
 p. 368).  The  first good  text reaches  the final  form (with  the name
 Rammas Echor in the last line) in all but the names of the dead Riders:
                                                                        
                                       Harding and Guthwin,              
                                                                        
          Dunhere and Marculf, Deorwin and Grimbold,                    
          Herufare and Herubrand, Horn and Fastred,                      
          fought and fell there in a far country;                        
          in the mounds of Mundberg under mould they lie                 
          with their league-fellows, lords of Gondor.(19)               

                               NOTES.                                       
  1.  Cf.  the  initial  drafting  for the  end of  'The Siege  of Gondor'
      (p.  337),  ...  crown  that  sat upon  no visible  head save  only for
      the light of his pale eyes.'                                          
  2.  dwimorlakes:  'illusions,  phantoms'.  Old English  (ge)dwimor, -er;
      cf.  Wormtongue's  name  Dwimordene   of  Lorien   in  'The   King  of
      the  Golden  Hall'  (TT  p.  118),  and  Dwimorberg.  In   the  present
      chapter  in  RK  (p.  116)  Eowyn calls  the Lord  of the  Nazgul 'foul
      dwimmer-laik',  -laik  being  the  Old   Norse  ending   -leikr  corre-
      sponding to Old English -lac, here 'modernised' as -lake.             
  3.  Theoden son of Thengel: see p. 355 note 9.                            
  4.  The  word  is  most  naturally  read  as  'sound',  in  which  case  my
      father  inadvertently  repeated  it  instead  of  the  word  he  had in
      mind, e.g. 'riding'.                                                  
  5.  The  statement  in  'The  Ride  of  the  Rohirrim'  that  'Dernhelm had  
      left  his  place  and  in  the  darkness  was  moving  steadily forward  
      until at last he was riding just in rear of the king's guard'  (p. 353)
      was added after the writing of the present passage; see also p. 356
      note 17.                                                              
  6.  Eowyn  calls  the  Lord  of  the   Nazgul  'foul   dwimmerlake',  where
      -lake was changed subsequently to -lord. See note 2.                  
  7.  Cf.  'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Forannest',  p. 360,  in which  it is
      said  that  Sauron  heard  from  the  Nazgul  of  the  defeat   on  the
      Pelennor and the corning of Aragorn.                                  
  8.  For  the  first  appearance  of  Angmar  see p.  334, and  of Dunedain
      p. 363 note 6.                                                        
  9.  The  name  Gothmog  is  one  of  the original  names of  the tradition,
      going  back  to  The Book  of Lost  Tales; Lord  of Balrogs,  slayer of
      Feanor and Fingon.                                                    
 10.  Khand,  Near  Harad,  and  Far  Harad  were  roughly  entered   on  the
      Second Map.                                                           
 11.  Emyn  Arnen  has  replaced  Haramon  (see  p.  359   and  note   3).  On
      the  origin  of  the  great  bend  in  the Anduin  around the  hills of
      Emyn Arnen see p. 438.                                                 
 12.  As first  written,  those  who  saw  the  black  sails cried  out: 'The
      Corsairs  of   Umbar!  See!   The  Corsairs   are  coming.   They  have
      overrun Amroth and Belfalas and Lebennin are destroyed!'              
 13.  In  the  First  Age  Finduilas  was  the daughter  of Orodreth  King of
      Nargothrond; she plays a major part in the Turinssaga.                
 14.  Narsil  reforged:  although  it  has  been said  that Aragorn  gave the
      name  Branding  to  the  Sword  of  Elendil  after  its  reforging (see
      VII.274  and  note  19),  its ancient  name has  never been  told until
      now.                                                                  
 15.  In  the  account  of  the  men  of the  Outlands entering  Minas Tirith
      given on p. 287 Duinhir is mentioned, but not his sons.               

                
                                                                      
16.  In LR Elfhelm was not slain in the Battle  of the  Pelennor Fields,
 but  survived  to  command   the  three   thousand  Riders   of  Rohan
 who  were  sent  to  'waylay  the  West  Road  against the  enemy that
 was  in  Anorien'  (RK  p.  158;  the  leader  of  this force  was not
 named in  the First  Edition, but  Elfhelm is  named in  both editions
 as  among  those  who  stood  before  the gates  of Minas  Tirith when
 the Captains of the West returned, RK p. 244).                        
17.   maker:   used   in   the   long   since   lost    sense   'poet'.
18.   We heard of the horns in the hills ringing is a variant entered at
 the time of writing both in this text and in that following.          
19.   Guthwin  was  later  changed  to Cuthlaf  on this  manuscript (see
 p. 368). Herufare is  written so  (for expected  -fara) both  here and
 (apparently)  in  a  scrap   of  rough   drafting  for   the  passage;
 Herefara in RK.                                                       

                                     X.                                   
                                                                         
                            THE PYRE OF DENETHOR.                         
                                                                         
 The original brief draft of this chapter ('A'), mercifully  written fairly
 legibly  in  ink  and  not  in  pencil subsequently  overwritten, extended
 from  'When  the  dark  shadow  at  the  Gate withdrew'  as far  as 'There
 was no guard at the gate of the  Citadel. "Berithil  has gone  then," said
 Pippin' (RK p. 127). The  final text  was naturally  not reached  in every
 turn  of  expression  or  every  detail,  but  apart  from the  absence of
 the  meeting  with  Prince  Imrahil  as  Gandalf and  Pippin rode  up from
 the  Gate  on  Shadowfax  there   is  no   narrative  difference   of  any
 significance.(1) At  this  point  my father  stopped and  set down  a brief
 outline ('B').                                                           
                                                                         
 ?  Porter  dead  at  Closed Door.  ? They  see fire  and smoke           
 below  as  they  hurry  down  the  winding road.  Berithil has           
 rebelled, and taking  some of  the guard  has fought  with the           
 household men. Before they  could gain  entrance to  the tomb,           
 one of these  dashed back  and set  a torch  in the  wood. But           
 Berithil was just in time to save Faramir. But Denethor leaped           
 back  into the  flames and  was now  dead. Gandalf  closed the           
 door. 'That ends a chapter!' he said. 'Let the Stewards burn -           
 their days are over.' Light is growing fast. Faramir  is borne           
 away to the house  where women  were who  remained in  city to           
 tend sick.                                                               
                                                                         
  A large question  mark was  placed against  the first  part of  this, and
 it  was  evidently  rejected  as  soon  as  written  and  replaced  by the
 following:                                                               
                                                                         
 ? Berithil and guard had gone and stopped the burning.                   
 Gandalf reasons  with Denethor.  'I have  seen' says  Denethor          
 'ships coming up Anduin: I will no  more yield  to an  upstart -         
 and even if his claim be true of the younger line: I  am Steward         
 for the sons of Anarion not of Isildur - than [to] my dark foe.'         
                                                                         
       The development from this point is hard to be sure of, but I am
 almost  certain  that  the  next  step  was  the  following  outline ('C'),
 written  in  ink  around  and  through  (but  not  over)  a   much  rougher
 outline also  in ink  (briefer but  essentially the  same, with  mention of
 the palantir):                                                           
                                                                         
          Gandalf and Pippin hear clash of arms as they hasten down       

 the winding  road  to  Rath  Dinen.  When   they  reach   the  Tombs
 they  find  Berithil holding  the door  alone against  the houschold-
 men,  who  wish  to  obey Denethor's  orders and  come and  set fire
 to  the  pyre.  From  within   comes  Denethor's   voice  commanding
 Berithil by his oaths to let them enter.                            
   Gandalf  sweeps   aside  the   men  and   goes  in.   He  upbraids
 Denethor,  but  Denethor  laughs  at him.  Denethor has  a palantir!
 He has seen the coming of  Aragorn. But  he has  also seen  the vast
 forces still gathered in Mordor, and  says that  victory in  arms is
 no longer  possible. He  will not  yield up  the Stewardship  'to an
 upstart  of  the  younger  line:  I  am  Steward  of  the   sons  of
 Anarion.' He wants things to be as they were - or not at all.       
   Gandalf  demands  the  release  of  Faramir,  and   when  Denethor
 attempts to  slay him  ('he shall  not live  to bow  down!') Gandalf
 strikes  the  sword from  his hand,  and lets  suddenly be  seen his
 power  so  that  even  Denethor  quails. Gandalf  bids the  men lift
 up Faramir and bear him from the chamber.                           
   Denethor says 'At  least so  far my  rule still  holds that  I may
 determine  my  own  death.'  He  sets  fire  to  the  wood  which is
 oil-drenched.  Then  he  leaps  onto  the stone  bed. He  breaks the
 wand of his Stewardship and  lays the  pieces on  his lap,  and lies
 down  taking  the  Stone  between  his  hands.  Then  Gandalf leaves
 him.  He  closes  the  door and  the flames  roar within.  They hear
 Denethor  give  a  great  cry,  and  then  no  more. 'So  passes the
 Stewardship of Gondor!' said Gandalf.  It is  said that  ever after,
 if anyone  looked in  that Stone,  unless he  had great  strength of
 will,  he  saw  only  two  old  hands  withering in  flames. [Added:
 Gandalf  bids  Berithil  and  household  men  not to  mourn -  or be
 too downcast. Each side has tried to do their duty.]                
   They  now  bear  Faramir  to  the  house of  the sick.  As Gandalf
 and  Pippin climb  back up  the road  they hear  the last  shriek in
 the air of the  Nazgul. Gandalf  stands still  a moment.  'Some evil
 has befallen! ' he says, 'which but  for the  madness of  Denethor I
 could  have  averted.  So  far  is the  reach of  the Enemy.  But we
 know  how  his  will  had  entry to  the White  Tower. By  the Stone.
 Though  he  could  not  daunt  Denethor  or  enslave  him,  he  could
 fill him  with  despair,  mistrust  and  unwisdom.'  When  Faramir  is
 placed  under  care  with  Berithil  as guard  they meet  the funeral
 cortege.   Where   is  Merry?   Pippin  volunteers   to  try   and  find
 Merry.                                                              
                                                                    
   Most of the essential ideas of the chapter were present here - and
 one that was rejected:  Denethor knew  who was  aboard the  black fleet

 and  what  his  coming  meant  (see  pp.  378 -  9). This  knowledge he
 derived from the palantir; and since it  is present  also in  the brief
 preceding outline B the existence of  the palantir  in the  White Tower
 must be presumed there also.(2)                                        
   At this stage, I think, my father began on a new text of  the chapter
 ('D'), continuing  as far  as Gandalf's  words concerning  'the heaehen
 kings' (RK  p. 129).  The final  text is  here very  closely approached (3)
 until near the end  (which is  very rough  and has  various alternative
 readings):                                                             
                                                                       
   Then  Gandalf  showing  now  a  marvellous   strength  leapt   up  on
 the  faggots  and  raising  the  sick man  bore him  out of  the deadly
 house;   and   as   he  was   moved  Faramir   moaned  and   spoke  his
 father's name.                                                         
   Then  Denethor  stepped  forward  and  the  flame  died  in  his eyes
 and  he  wept,  and  he  said:  'Do  not  take  my  son  from   me.  He
 calls for me.'                                                         
   'He  calls  for  you,*  said  Gandalf.  'But you  cannot come  to him
 save  in  one  way.  You  must  go  out  to  the  battle  of  your City
 putting  away  despair  and  risking death  in the  field; and  he must
 struggle for life  against hope  in the  dark ways  of his  fever. Then
 perchance  you  may  meet  again.  /  For  unless  you  go  out  to the
 battle  of  your City  putting away  despair and  risking death  in the
 field you will never speak again with him in the waking world.'        
   'He   will   not   wake   again,'  said   Denethor.  'His   house  is
 crumbling.  Let  us  die  together.'  / 'At  least we  can go  to death
 side by side,' said Denethor. 'That lies not  in the  will of  the Lord
 of this  City or  of any  other,' said  Gandalf. 'For  you are  not yet
 dead.  And  so  do  the  heathen  kings  under  the  dominion   of  the
 Dark  Lord,  to  slay  themselves  in  pride  and  despair  or  to slay
 their kin for the easing of their own death.'                          
                                                                       
   In RK this  is followed  by 'Then  passing through  the door  he took
 Faramir from the deadly  house and  laid him  on the  bier on  which he
 had been brought, and which  had now  been set  in the  porch. Denethor
 followed him ...'; for it is clear that  Gandalf, bearing  Faramir, had
 halted at Denethor's  words 'Do  not take  my son  from me!',  and only
 now moved through the door. But in the text just given it is  said that
 Gandalf bore Faramir 'out of the deadly house' as soon as he had lifted
 him from the pyre.                                                     
   It was perhaps at this stage that  my father  wrote a  single discon-
 tinuous  page  ('E')  beginning  with  the  words  'Gandalf  now  takes
 Faramir'. Here  as in  RK Denethor  follows him;  but no  further words
 are spoken until, after a long hesitation while he looks on Faramir, he

  declares  that  he  will  rule  his  own  end,  and  his   death  follows
  immediately. It is curious that Denethor is here said to die clasping the
  palantir, yet there is no drafting of the scene in  which he  reveals his
  possession of it.                                                        
                                                                          
     Gandalf now takes Faramir.                                            
                  Denethor now followed him to the door. And he trembled,
  looking  in  longing  at  his  son  and  hesitating. Yet  in the  end his
  pride  and  wilfulness  overmastered  him  and  he  was  fey  again.  'At
  least  in  this  you  shall  not  defy  and  snatch  my  power  away,' he
  said.  And  stepping  suddenly  forth   he  seized   a  torch   from  the
  band  of  one  of  his  servants,  and  moving   back  thrust   it  among
  the  wood,  which  being  drenched  in  oil  roared  at  once  into flame
  and  a  black  smoke  filled  the  house.  Then  Denethor   leaped  again
 .  onto  the  table  amid the  fire and  fume, and  breaking the  staff of
 his  stewardship  on  his  knee  he  cast  it  into  the  flames  and laid
 himself  back  on  his  pillow  clasping  the  palantir  with  both  hands
 to his breast.                                                            
    Gandalf  in  sorrow  and  horror   turned  his   face  away   and  came
 forth,  closing  the  door.  For  a  while  he  stood in  thought silently
 upon  the  topmost  step.  And  they  heard  the   roar  and   crackle  of
 the   flames   within;   and  then   Denethor  gave   a  great   cry,  and
 afterward spoke no more, nor was seen again by mortal man.                
    'So  passes  the  Stewardship   of  Gondor!'   said  Gandalf.   And  he
 -,  turned  to   Berithil  and   the  lord's   servants.  'Do   not  mourn
 overmuch,'  he  said.  'For  the  old  days  have   passed  for   good  or
 evil.  And  be  not  grieved  with  your  own  deeds. For  all here,  as I
 see  it,  have  striven   to  do   as  they   judged  right,   whether  in
 obedience  and  the  keeping  of  vows  or  in   the  breaking.   For  you
 servants   of   the   Lord  owed   obedience  only   to  your   Lord,  but
 Berithil   owed   also   allegiance   first  to   the  Lord   Faramir  the
 captain  of  the  guard.  So  let  now  all  hate   or  anger   that  lies
 between   you  fall   away  and   be  forgotten.   Bear  away   those  who
 have  fallen  in  this  unhappy  place.  And  we  will  bear Faramir  to a
 place  where  he  can  die  in  peace  if  that  is  his  doom,   or  find
 healing.'                                                                 
   So  now  Gandalf  and  Berithil  taking  up  the  bier that  stood still
 in the  porch  before   the  doors   set  Faramir   upon  it   and  slowly
 bore him  away  to  the  houses  of  the  sick,  and  the   servants  came
 behind   bearing   their   fellows.   And   when   they   came   at  length
 through  the  closed   door  Gandalf   bade  Berithil   who  had   the  key
 to lock  it.  And  as  they  passed  into  the upper  circles of  the City
 there  was  heard  in  the air  the cry  of the  Lord of  the Nazgul  as it

 rose and passed away for ever. And they stood for a moment                
 stricken with wonder.                                                     
                                                                          
  This  was  followed  (again  with  some  doubt as  to the  sequence) by
 another  discontinuous  page  ('F')  that  takes  up  in  the  course of
 Gandalf's  reply  to  Denethor's  words  'Do  not take  my son  from me!
 He calls for me':                                                         
                                                                          
 '...  But  he  now must  strive for  life in  the dark  ways of  his fever
 seeking  healing;  and  you  must  go  out  to  the  battle of  your city,
 risking  death,  if  it  must  be,  in the  field. This  you know  well in
 your heart.'                                                              
  But  Denethor  laughed.   And  going   back  to   the  table   he  lifted
 from  it  the  pillow  that  he  had  lain  on.  And  lo!  in his  hand he
 bore  a  palantir.  'Pride  and  despair!'  he said.  'Did you  think that
 [the]  eyes  of  the  White  Tower  were  blind?'   he  said.   [Added  in
 pencil,  without  direction  for  insertion:  This  the  Stone   of  Minas
 Tirith  has  remained  ever  in  the  secret  keeping  of the  Stewards in
 the  topmost  chamber.]  Nay,  nay,   1  see   more  than   thou  knowest,
 Grey Fool ...'(4)                                                          
                                                                          
  The  page  then  continues  very  close  to  the   final  text   (RK  pp.
 129  -  30),  except  in  the  view  taken  of  Denethor's   knowledge  of
 Aragorn  and  the  black  fleet.  In  RK,  as final  proof that  the power
 arrayed  against  Minas  Tirith  is  too   great  far   any  withstanding,
 Denethor  declares  to  Gandalf  that  'even  now  the  wind  of  thy hope
 cheats thee and wafts up Anduin a  fleet with  black sails.'  He therefore
 does  not  know  who  is   aboard.  But   (after  Gandalf's   reply  'Such
 counsels will  make the  Enemy's victory  certain indeed')  he goes  on to
 accuse  him  of  commanding Pippin  'to keep  silence', and  of installing
 him  as a  spy in  his chamber;  'and yet  in our  speech together  I have
 learned  the  names  and  purpose  of  all  thy  companions. So!  With the
 left hand  thou wouldst  use me  for a  little while  as a  shield against
 Mordor,  and  with  the  right  bring  up  this  Ranger  of  the  North to
 supplant me.'  As the  text stands  in RK  it is  not clear  what Denethor
 means  by 'with  the right  hand'; for  he does  not know  that it  is the
 'upstart' Aragorn who is coming up the Great River.                       
   From  the  present  text  F,  however,  it  is  clear what  Denethor did
 originally  mean  by  'with  his right  hand'. Here,  he does  not mention
 the black fleet in the first of these speeches; and in the second he makes
 no reference at all to Pippin - so that it is not from Pippin that  he has
 learned  of  Aragorn's  coming.  But  then he  goes on:  'But I  know your
 mind and its plots. Do I not  see the  fleets even  now coming  up Anduin!
 So  with  the  left  hand you  would use  me as  a shield  against Mordor,
 and with the  right hand  bring up  this Ranger  of the  North to  take my
 place.'  Here  it  is  obvious  that  he  does  know  who is  aboard (with

  his left  hand,  one  might  suppose,  he  gestures  towards   Osgiliath  and
  with  his  right  towards  Pelargir);  and  he  knew it  from use  of the
  palantir, as is expressly stated in the outline C (p. 375): 'Denethor has
  a palantir! He has seen the coming of Aragorn.'                          
    This text (F) ends thus:                                               
                                                                          
    'But   who   saith   that   the   Steward  who   faithfully  surrenders
  shall  have  diminishment  of  love  and  honour!  And  at  the  last you
  shall  not  rob  your  son  of  his  choice,  slaying  him in  your proud
  wickedness  while  yet  healing  is  in  doubt.  This  you shall  not do.
  Yield me now Faramir!'                                                  
                                                                          
    It is hard to know what  these last  words imply,  since at  this point
  Gandalf  must  have  already  raised  Faramir  from  the stone  table and
  moved towards the door.  It seems  possible that  some drafting  has been
  lost,  which  would  have  made  clearer  the  evolution  of   the  final
  structure in this chapter.                                               
    At  any rate,  my father  now began  another text  ('G'), for  which he
  used  the  initial  pages  of  D  (p.  376), but  soon diverged  into new
  manuscript,  roughly  written but  now completing  the chapter;  and here
  the  substance  and  structure of  RK was  reached with  few differences.
  The manuscript had originally no  title, but  at some  point he  wrote on
  it  'XLVIII  The Pyre  of Denethor':  at that  stage, presumably,  he was
  treating  'The  Ride of  the Rohirrim'  and 'The  Battle of  the Pelennor
  Fields'  as one  chapter (see  pp. 351,  367). 'XLVIII'  was subsequently
  changed to 'XLIX' and 'V.6'.(5)                                          
    As  first  written,  the  different  view  of  Denethor's  knowledge of
  Aragorn  and  the  black  fleet  was preserved,  though changed  later on
  the manuscript to the  final form  (on this  question see  pp. 390  - 1).
  Gandalf still said 'So passes the Stewardship of  Gondor' for  'So passes
  Denethor,  son  of Ecthelion';  and in  his address  to Berithil  and the
  servants of Denethor who stood  by he  said: 'But  Berithil of  the guard
  owed allegiance first to his captain,  Faramir, to  succour him  while he
  lived' (cf. p. 377). This was changed on the manuscript to read:         
                                                                          
  '... For you servants of the Lord owed obedience to him only.            
  And he who says: "my master is not in his mind, and knows not            
  what he bids; I will not do it", is in  peril, unless  he has            
  knowledge  and  wisdom.  But  to Berithil  of the  guard such            
  discernment was a duty, whereas (6) also he owed allegiance first            
  to his captain, Faramir, to succour him while he lived.'                 
                                                                          
    This was preserved in the fair copy  ('H') that  followed, and  was not
  rewritten  to the  form in  RK (p.  131) until  the typescript  stage was
  reached.  At  the end  of this  passage my  father wrote,  as in  D, that
  Gandalf and Berithil bore Faramir  to 'the  houses of  the sick',  but he
  changed this to 'the Houses  of Healing',  with the  Elvish name  Berin a

  Nestad,  changed  at  once  to  Bair  Nestedriu, both  of which  were struck
  out; but a little later in the chapter ('So now at last they passed into the
  high circles of the  City, and  in the  light of  morning they  went towards
  the houses that were set apart for the tending  of men  hurt or  dying', cf.
  RK  p.  131)  the  name  Bair  Nestedriu  reappears.  In  the  fair  copy  H
  there is no Elvish name  for the  Houses of  Healing in  the first  of these
  passages, but at the  second the  form Bair  Nestad is  found. In  the first
  typescript,  in  this  same  passage,  the  name  is  Edeb na  Nestad, which
  was struck through.                                                         
    At  this  time  the story  was that  Gandalf and  Pippin rode  through the
  Closed  Door  on their  way to  Rath Dinen  (see note  3). Now,  as Berithil
  and  Gandalf  bore  the  bier,  'behind  them walked  Pippin and  beside him
  Shadowfax   with  downcast   head';  and   when  they   came  back   to  the
  Door  (here  called  'the  Steward's Door'  as in  RK; 'the  Stewards' Door'
  in the  fair copy)  Gandalf sent  Shadowfax back  to his  stable, dismissing
  him  in  the  same  words  that  in  RK  (p.  127) he  used when  they first
  came to the Door.                                                           
    At  the  point  in  the  narrative  where  the  dome of  the House  of the
  Stewards  in  Rath  Dinen  cracked  and  fell,  and  'then  in   terror  the
  servants  fled,  and  followed  Gandalf',  my  father  set down  an outline,
  which was struck through.                                                   
                                                                             
    Gandalf  must  say  something  about  the  Stone.  How  it was            
  kept in Tower but only kings supposed to  look in  it.(7) Denethor            
  in his  grief when  Faramir returned  must have  looked in  it -            
  hence his madness and despair. For though not yielding to                   
  Enemy (like Saruman)  he got  an impression  of the  Dark Lord's            
  overwhelming might. The will of the Lord thus entered the                   
  Tower, confused all counsels, and kept Gandalf from the field.               
  All this takes about 1 1/2 hours to nearly 8  o'clock? So  as they            
  come out into the upper circles they hear the dreadful shriek of            
  the Nazgul's end. Gandalf forbodes evil.  Does Gandalf  look out            
  from  a  high  place?  When  [he]  has put  Faramir in  the sick            
  quarters with Berithil as his servant and guard, Gandalf and                
  Pippin  go back  down towards  the Gates  and meet  the cortege,            
  with bodies of Eowyn and Theoden.(8) Gandalf takes charge; but               
  Pippin goes in  search of  Merry; and  meets him  wandering half            
  blind.  Eventually Gandalf  and Pippin  stand on  battlement and            
  watch progress of battle. Gandalf says he is not needed there so            
  much  as with  the sick.  Pippin (and  Gandalf?) see  the coming            
  of Aragorn and the fleet. Eventually  the captains  return after            
  victory at the Red Sunset.                                                  
    Council  must  follow next  day. Is  any account  of Aragorn's            
  march put in at council?                                                    

   The  text in  this manuscript  (G) was  then continued  to the  end; and
 when  my  father  came  to record  Gandalf's words  about the  palantir of
 Minas Tirith they took this form:                                         
                                                                          
 '... Alas! but now I perceive how it was thai his will was able           
 to enter among us into the very heart of this City.                       
   'Long have  I guessed  that here  in the  White Tower,  as at           
 Orthanc,  one  of  the  great  Stones  of Sight  was preserved.           
 Denethor did not in the days of his wisdom ever presume  to use           
 it,  nor to  challenge Sauron,  knowing the  limits of  his own           
 powers.  But  in  his grief  for Faramir,  distraught by  the hopeless
 peril  of his  City, he  must have  dared to  do this:  to look  in the
 Stone.  He  hoped  maybe  to  see  if  help  was  drawing  nigh;  but  the
 ways  of  the  Rohirrim  in  the  North  were  hidden;   and  he   saw  at
 first  only  what  was  preparing  in  the  South.  And  then   slowly  his
 eye  was  drawn  east,  to  see  what it  was willed  that he  should see.
 And  this  vision  [struck  oat:  true  or  false] of  the great  might of
 Mordor,  fed  the  despair  that  was  already  in  his  heart   until  it
 rose and engulfed his mind.'                                               
   ['That  fits  well  with  what  I  saw,'  said  Pippin.  'The  Lord went
 away   from   the   room   where  Faramir   lay;  and   it  was   when  he
 came back chat I first thought he was changed, old and broken.'         
   'It  was  in  the  very  hour  that  Faramir   was  brought   back  that
 many  saw  a  strange  light  in  the  topmost  chamber  of   the  Tower,'
 said Berithil.                                                            
   'Alas!  then  I  guess  truly,'  said  Gandalf.]   'Thus  the   will  of
 Sauron   entered  into   the  Tower;   and  thus   I  have   been  delayed
 here....'                                                                 
                                                                          
     The passage that I have enclosed in square brackets was an addition,
 but pretty clearly one made at the time of writing. In the fair copy
 manuscript of 'The Siege of Gondor' the passage describing how
 Prince Imrahil brought Faramir to the White Tower after his rescue,
 how Denethor then went up to the secret room under the summit of
 the Tower, and how a light was seen flickering there (RK pp. 94 - 5),
 was absent: see p. 340 note 17. It was no doubt at this time that it was
 added. The fair copy H retains the form of the passage just given; it
 was not until later that it was revised to introduce Gandalf's guess that
 Denethor had looked many times into the palantir, and Berithil's
 corroboration 'But we have seen that light before, and it has been
 rumoured in the City that the Lord would at times wrestle in thought
 with his Enemy.' In the original manuscript of 'Minas Tirith' he had
 said to Pippin as they sat on the battlements that Denethor was
 reputed to be able to 'read somewhat of the mind of the Enemy' as he

                                                                
                                                                               
   sat  in  his  high  chamber  at  night,  but he  did not  then add  the words
   'wrestling with him',  nor 'And  so it  is that  he is  old, worn  before his
   time'  (RK  p.  37;  p.  292  note  21).  Thus  Pippin's words,  preserved in
   RK,  'it  was only  when he  returned that  I first  thought he  was changed,
   old  and  broken'  were  written  when my  father believed  that it  was only
   now  and  for  the  first  time  that  Denethor  had dared  to look  into the
   Seeing Stone of Minas Tirith.                                                
                                                                               
                                       NOTES.                                   
                                                                               
   1.     Gandalf says here: 'Is it not a law in the City that those  who wear
          the black and silver must stay in the Citadel unless their lord leaves
          it?' And Pippin replies: 'He has left it.' For a previous use  of this
          passage in a different context see p. 338 and note 23.                
   2.     Cf. the original manuscript of the chapter  'Minas Tirith',  p. 281:
          'And Denethor at least does not  expect him  in any  way, for  he does
          not  know  that  he  exists.' This  in fact  survived through  all the
          typescripts  and  was  only  changed on  the proof  to the  reading of
          RK: 'Though if he comes, it is likely to be  in some  way that  no one
          expects, not even Denethor.'                                          
   3.     A minor   narrative  difference   is  that   when  Gandalf   and  Pippin
          came  to  the  Closed  Door  on  Shadowfax   they  rode   through  it,
          though  on the  steep winding  road beyond  'they could  go only  at a
          walk.'  In  RK  Gandalf  'dismounted  and  bade  Shadowfax  return  to
          his stable' (see p. 380).                                             
   4.     When writing a very  rapid draft  my father  would move  from 'thou'
          to 'you' in  the same  speech, but  his intention  from the  first was
          certainly that  in this  scene Denethor  should 'thou'  Gandalf, while
          Gandalf  should  use 'you'.  In one  passage confusion  between 'thou'
          and  'you'  remains  in  RK  (Denethor's  speech  beginning  'Hope  on
          then!', p. 129). Here  in the  fair copy  manuscript my  father wrote:
          'Do  I  not  know  that  you  commanded  this  halfling  here  to keep
          silence?';   subsequently   he  changed   'you  commanded'   to  'thou
          commandedst',  but  presumably  because  he  disliked  this   form  he
          changed  the  sentence  to  'Do  I  not  know  that this  halfling was
          commanded  by  thee  ...'  At  the  same  time  he added  the sentence
          'That  you  brought  him  hither  to  be  a  spy  within  in  my  very
          chamber?',  changing  it  immediately  and  for  the  same  reason  to
          'That  he  was  brought  hither  ...'  For   some  reason   the  'you'
          constructions reappeared in the first typescript, and so remained.
   5.     'V.6',  not  'V.7'  as   in  RK,   because  'The   Passing  of   the  Grey
          Company'  and  'The  Muster   of  Rohan'   were  still   one  chapter,
          'Many  Roads  Lead  Eastward'.  The  fair  copy  manuscript   (H)  was
          also  numbered  'XLIX'  and  'V.6', with  the title  '(a) The  Pyre of
          Denethor'.                                                            

           
                                                                      
6.   The meaning of whereas here is 'inasmuch as', 'seeing that'.          
7.   I take this to mean, in a colloquial sense of 'supposed', 'it was only
     the kings who were held to be permitted to look in it', rather than
     'it was only the kings who looked in it, as it was thought.'          
     The story now was that Eowyn was still alive: p. 369.                 

                                      XI.                                    
                             THE HOUSES OF HEALING.                          
                                                                            
 On  the  same  page  that  my  father  used  for  the  original  opening draft
 (A) of 'The Pyre of  Denethor' (p.  374) he  also wrote  a brief  passage for
 another  place  in   the  narrative,   beginning:  '"Well,   Meriadoc,  where
 are  you  going?" He  looked up,  and there  was Gandalf.'  This was,  I feel
 certain, the  opening of  a new  chapter; and  since it  stands first  on the
 page,  with  the opening  of 'The  Pyre of  Denethor' below  it, it  seems to
 me  likely   that  my   father  for   a  moment   thought  to   continue  the
 narrative  after  'The  Battle  of  the  Pelennor  Fields'  in this  way. But
 however  this  may  be,  he  subsequently  on  another  page  (numbered  'a')
 wrote  a  new  opening  ('A  mist  was  in  Merry's  eyes  of  tears  and  of
 weariness  when  they  drew  near  to  the  ruined  Gates of  Minas Tirith'),
 and  joined  this  on  to  the first  opening (now  numbered 'b')  already in
 existence. This first part ('a') of the brief composite text is  already very
 close  indeed  to  the opening  of the  chapter in  RK; the  second (earlier)
 part 'b' differs  from the  text of  RK in  that it  is Gandalf,  not Pippin,
 who finds Merry wandering in the streets of the City:                       
                                                                            
  'Well, Meriadoc, where are you going?'                                     
  He looked up, and the mist before his eyes cleared a little,(1)            
 and there was Gandalf. He was in a narrow empty street, and                 
 no one else was there. He passed his hand over his eyes. 'Where             
 is the king?' he said, 'and Eowyn, and - ' he stumbled and sat              
 down on a doorstep and began to weep again.                                 
  'They have gone into the Citadel,' said Gandalf. 'You must                 
 have fallen asleep on your feet and taken a wrong turning. You              
 are worn out, and I will ask no questions yet, save one: are you            
 hurt, or wounded?'                                                          
  'No,' said Merry, 'well, no, I don't think so. But I cannot use            
 my right arm, not since I stabbed him. The sword has burned                 
 away like wood.'                                                            
  Gandalf looked grave. 'Well, you must come with me. I will                
 carry you. You are not fit to walk. They should not have let you.           
 But then they did not know about you or they would have                     
 shown you more honour. But when you know more you will                      
 pardon them: many dreadful things have happened in this City.'            
  'Pardon them? What for?' said Merry. 'All I want is a bed if               
 there's one to have.'                                                       

                              
                                                                   
   'You'll have chat,'  said Gandalf,  'but you  may need  more.' He
 looked  grave  and  careworn. 'Here  is yet  another on  my hands,'
 he sighed.  'After war  comes the  woe and  hopeless oft  seems the
 task of the healer.'                                               
                                                                   
   At this point the part 'b' ends and is followed by 'When the dark
 shadow  at  the Gate  withdrew Gandalf  still sat  motionless', the
 opening of 'The Pyre of Denethor', as described above.             
   My father now wrote an  outline, obviously  before the  story had
 proceeded further.                                                 
                                                                   
   Pippin  meets Merry  wandering half  blind and  witless -  (as in
 scene  previously  written:  but  not  humorous).  Merry   also  is
 taken to sickhouse (Faramir, Eowyn, Merry).                        
   [King  Theoden  is  laid  on bier  in Hall  of the  Tower covered
 with  gold.  His  body  is  embalmed  after  the manner  of Gondor.
 Long  after  when  the  Rohirrim  carried  it  back  to  Rohan  and
 laid it in the mounds, it  was said  that he  slept there  in peace
 unchanged,  clad  in the  cloth of  gold of  Gondor, save  that his
 hair and beard  still grew  but were  golden, and  a river  of gold
 would  at  times  flow  from  Theoden's Howe.  Also a  voice would
 be heard crying                                                    
               Arise, arise, Riders of Theoden                      
               Fell deeds awake. Forth Eorlingas!                   
 when peril threatened.](2)                                         
                                                                   
   Now the Captains  return. But  Aragorn sets  his pavilion  in the
 field  before  the  gate and  will not  enter without  permission and
 sends  in  word  begging  leave  to  enter   and  speak   with  the
 Steward. They tell him that  the Steward  is dead  by his  own hand
 and the Lord Faramir sick,  to death.  Then he  lays aside  all the
 badges  of  Elendil,  and  enters  as  a  plain man.  Aragorn meets
 Pippin  and  Gandalf  and  asks after  Merry. He  is given  news of
 Eowyn. Great joy of Eomer.                                         
   All that night Aragorn tends the  sick, for  the Kings  of Gondor
 had both a craft and a power of healing, and  by this  [?latter] it
 was  made  clear that  the  true king  was returned.  Faramir opens
 his  eyes  and  looks  on  Aragorn and  love springs  between them.
 Merry too recovers.                                                
   Counsel  [read  Council]  of  the   Lords.  Gandalf   warns  them
 that what Denethor had  said is  true: there  was no  final victory
 in  arms  against  the  Enemy.  We  fought here  as best  we could,
 because  we  had  to; and  it is  so appointed  in this  world that
 resistance must be made  to evil  without final  hope. But  when we

                                                                   
                                                                          
 take   arms   to  attack   we  are   using  that   power  which   is  pre-
 eminently  found  in  the  Ring,  and  it  would  be  logical  to   do  as
 Denethor  desired  in  that  case:  to   use  the   Ring.  So   indeed  we
 should   probably    [?now]   have    victory   and    overthrow   Sauron.
 But  only  to  set up  another. So  that in  the end  the result  would be
 as  evil,  if different,  or possibly  worse, as  if Sauron  recovered the
 Ring.  Therefore  have  I  ..... (3) recovery  in  order  that  for  a great
 age victory should be otherwise.                                          
     But  we  must  still  use  such  power  as  we  have.  And  not delay.
 Sauron must still be kept busy and deem we have the Ring.                 
                                                                          
     Another  page  of  outline-notes,  very  roughly  pencilled,  probably
 followed this.                                                            
                                                                          
    Long   sojourn   of   rest   in   Minas    Tirith   and    coming   of
 Finduilas?(4) [written above: and Galadriel].                              
     Hobbits  all  go  home  via  Rohan:  funeral  of  Theoden,   and  then
 through   Gap  and   up  west   of  Misty   Mountains  to   Rivendell  and
 then home.                                                                
     Yes,  said  Sam,  as  he  closed  the  Book.   That  all   happened  a
 long time ago.                                                            
     Aragorn will only enter as lord of the Forod, not as king.(5)         
     Lords   ride  in,   and  see   Theoden  lying   in  state.   Where  is
 Gandalf?  He  comes  in  late  [or  later]  and  tells of  Theoden's fall,(6)
 and Yoreth's words.                                                       
     They  go  to  Houses  of  Healing,  and  Aragorn  asks   for  athelas.
 He  heals  the  sick.  Yoreth  says  he  must  be  king.  After  supper he
 heals many sick.                                                          
     Council   next  day.   Gandalf's  advice.   Merry  wakes   up  feeling
 nearly  well.   While  Council   is  [?on]   Gimli,  Legolas   and  Pippin
 talk.  They  .....  and  hear  of  the  love  of  Eowyn  for   Aragorn  at
 Dunharrow. And of the great ride to Pelargir.                             
     The  lords  ride  east:  1000  Rohirrim,  Dol  Amroth  and  [?so  on].
 And  a   first  force   to  hold   Morgul.  They   ride  into   shadow  of
 ambush. Peril.                                                            
                                                                          
     A complete draft ('A') for the chapter  now followed,  written rapidly
 but legibly in ink. In the first part of the chapter there are passages of
 marked  divergence  from  the  story  that  followed.  The   manuscript  A
 was followed  by a  fair copy  'B', for  which some  pages were  taken out
 of A, including the  opening page  bearing the  chapter number  and title:
 'Ch.L  The  Houses  of  Healing',  the  number  changed   subsequently  to
 'XLIX (b)'.(7)                                                            
     The  first  divergence  in  A  from  RK  comes  with  Gandalf's  words

 when he came on  Pippin and  Merry on  the pavement  of the  main street
 up to the Citadel (RK p. 135):                                          
                                                                        
   'He  should  have  been  borne  in  honour into  this City,'  he said.
 'Greater  was  the  wisdom  of  Elrond  than  mine.  For  if  I  had had
 my  way  neither  you  nor  he,   Pippin,  would   have  set   out;  and
 then  far  more  grievous  would  the  evils  of  this  day  have  been.
 Faramir   and   Eowyn   would   be   dead,   and   the   Black   Captain
 would be abroad to work ruin on all hope.'                              
                                                                        
   This was repeated in  the fair  copy B,  and {with  loss of  the final
 sentence  'Faramir  and  Eowyn  would  be  dead  ...') in  the following
 typescripts: the change to 'He has well repaid my  trust: for  if Elrond
 had  not  yielded to  me, neither  of you  would have  set out'  was not
 made until the book was  in proof.  This is  decidedly strange:  for the
 form  of  the  Choosing of  the Company  in The  Fellowship of  the Ring
 (p.  289), in  which it  was through  Gandalf's advocacy  against Elrond
 that Merry and Pippin  were included,  had been  reached long  before in
 the  second version  of 'The  Ring Goes  South' (VII.164).  Earlier than
 this,  it  is true,  Gandalf had  also been  opposed to  their inclusion
 ('Elrond's decision is wise', he had said, VII.115), but only  here, and
 again in 'The Last Debate' (p. 415), is there any suggestion that it was
 Elrond who advocated their inclusion in opposition to Gandalf.          
   In the passage that follows, after the account  of the  'leechcraft of
 Gondor'  and  the  unknown   malady  named   'the  Black   Shadow'  that
 came from the Nazgul, the  text of  A is  much briefer  than that  of RK
 (p. 136):                                                               
                                                                        
 And those that were so stricken fell slowly ever into a deeper          
 dream, and from fever passed to a deadly cold and so died. But          
 Faramir burned with a fever that would not abate.                       
   And an old wife, Yoreth                                               
                                                                        
   Thus  there  is  no  reference here  to the  morning wearing  away and
 the day passing to sunset, while 'still Gandalf  waited and  watched and
 did not go forth'; and after Yoreth had uttered the old saying that 'The
 hands of the king are the hands of a healer' A diverges  altogether from
 the later story.                                                        
                                                                        
   'Mithrandir  is wise  and skilful,'  said another.  'In this  at least
 he  is  not  a  king,'  said the  old wife.  'He has  done much  for us,
 but  rather  his skill  lies in  the teaching  of men,  to do  what they
 can or should.'                                                         
   But  Gandalf  seeing  that  all  was  done  that  could  be  done  for
 the present  arose  and  went  out,  and  calling  for   Shadowfax  rode
 away.                                                                   

   But   Pippin   and  Berithil   found  themselves   together  little
 needed  while  the sick  were yet  in peril,  and while  such errands
 as  were  needful  were  done by  the boys,  Bergil and  his friends,
 who  had  been  saved  from  the  wreck  of  the  Rath  a  Chelerdain
 and  sent  up hither.  So they  went to  the roof  of the  house that
 stood  above  the  battlement  of  the  wall,  and  they  looked out.
 The  battle  now  raged  upon  the fields;  but it  was far  from the
 walls,  and  all  the  enemy  had  now  been  drawn  away   from  the
 City;  and  they  could  not  mark  how  fortune  went: nought  but a
 dust  and  a  smoke  in  the  distance  away  southward,  and  a  far
 crying of horn and of trumpet.  Yet so  it was  that Pippin  with the
 farsighted eyes  of his  people was  the first  to descry  the coming
 of the fleet.                                                        
   'Look,  look,  Berithil!'  he   cried.  'The   Lord  was   not  all
 demented.  He  saw  something  in  truth.  There  are  ships  on  the
 River.'                                                              
   'Yes,'  said  Berithil.  'But  not  such  as  he  spoke of.  I know
 the  ...(8) of those  ships  and  their sails.  They come  from Umbar
 and the havens of the Corsairs. Hark!'                              
   And  all  about  them  men  were  crying  in dismay:  'The Corsairs
 of Umbar!'                                                           
   'You  may  say  what  you  like  and  so  may  they,'  said Pippin,
 'but this I will say for my  lord who  is dead:  I will  believe him.
 Here  comes  Aragorn.  Though  how,  and  why in  this way  I cannot
 guess. Here  comes the  heir of  Elendil!' he  shouted; but  no one,
 not even Berithil, took any heed of his small voice.                 
   Yet true  he proved.  And at  last it  was known  in the  City. And
 all  men  were  full  of wonder.  And so  hope grew  as the  day rose
 to  noon  and  waned,  and at  last it  came to  the red  sunset. And
 watchers looking  out saw  all the  fields before  them dyed  as with
 blood,  and the  sky above  them was  bloodred, and  at last  ere the
 red  burned  out  to  evening  ash-grey  over   the  fields   of  the
 Pelennor rode the captains in victory to the City.                   
   Aragorn  and  Eomer  and  Imrahil  now  drew  near  the  City  with
 their  captains  and  knights;   and  when   they  came   before  the
 Gates Aragorn said: 'Behold the setting of the sun in fire ...'      
                                                                     
   Aragorn's  words are  then as  in RK  p. 137,  and his  speech with
 Eomer that follows; but with Imrahil's intervention the original text
 diverges again:                                                      
                                                                     
   And  the  Prince  Imrahil  said:  'Wise  are your  words, lord,  if 
 one  who  is  kinsman  of  the  house  of the  Stewards may  venture to

 give  counsel.  Yet  I  would  not  have you  remain at  the door  like a
 beggar.'                                                                    
   'Then  I  will  not,'  laughed  Aragorn.  '[added:   I  will   enter  as
 one.]   The   banner   shall   be   furled   and   the   tokens   no  more
 displayed.'   And   he   bade   Halbarad   [>   Elladan](9) to    furl   the
 standard,   and  he   removed  the   crown  and   stars (10) and   gave  them
 to the  keeping  of  the  sons  of  Elrond.  And  he  entered the  City on
 foot  clad  only  in  a  grey  mantle  above  his  mail  and   bearing  no
 other  token  save  the  green  stone  of  Galadriel,   and  he   said:  'I
 come only as Aragorn Lord of the Rangers of Forod.'(11)                   
   And  so  the  great  captains  of  victory   passed  through   the  city
 and  the  tumult  of  the  people,  and  mounted   to  the   Citadel,  and
 came to the Hall of the Tower seeking the Steward.                         
                                                                          
   The  description  of  Theoden  lying  in  state  follows  as in  RK (pp.
 137-8), but then the  story of  his afterlife  in the  mound at  Edoras is
 introduced  and  expanded  from the  outline given  on p.  385; I  cite it
 here from the fair copy B, where the text is all but identical to A except
 in the words heard from the mound.(12)                                    
                                                                          
   And  thus,  it  was  said  in  song,  he remained  ever after  while the
 realm  of  Rohan   endured.  For   when  later   the  Rohirrim   bore  his
 body  away  to  the  Mark  and  laid  it  in  the  mounds of  his fathers,
 there,  clad  in  the  cloth  of  gold  of  Gondor,   he  slept   in  peace
 unchanged,  save  only  that  his  hair  still  grew  and  was  turned  to
 silver,  and  at  times  a  river  of  silver  would  flow  from Theoden's
 Howe.   And   that   was   a   token   of   prosperity;   but   if   peril
 threatened  then  at  whiles  men  would  hear  a   voice  in   the  mound
 crying in the ancient tongue of the Mark:                                 
                                                                          
               Arisath nu Ridend mine!                                     
               Theodnes thegnas thindath on orde!                          
               Feond oferswithath! Forth Eorlingas!                   
                                                                          
   Then follow the questions of Imrahil and Eomer in the Hall of the       
 Tower,  whereby  they learn  that 'the  Steward is  in the  Houses of
 Healing'  (thinking  that  this  means  Denethor),  and Eomer  learns that
 Eowyn is still living, just as in RK, except that when Eomer leaves the
 hall 'the others followed him' ('and the Prince followed him' RK),         
 because Aragorn is present.                                            
                                                                          
    And  when  they  came  forth  evening  had come,  with many            
 stars And even as the  light waned  Gandalf returned  alone out            
 of the East  up  the  road from  Osgiliath, glimmering  in the            
 twilight. And he went also to the Houses of Healing, and he met            

 the Lords before its doors. And they greeted him; and they said:             
 'We seek the Steward and it is said that he is in this house.                
                                                                             
   In the passage that follows there are differences from RK, in that         
 Aragorn does not only now appear as 'the cloaked man' come with              
 Gandalf, unrecognised until he steps into the lantern-light. Thus            
 Imrahil says: 'Shall it not be the lord Aragorn?', and Aragorn replies:      
 'No, it shall be the Lord of Dol Amroth until Faramir awakes. But it is      
 my counsel that Mithrandir should rule us all in the days that follow        
 and our dealings with the Enemy.' Then Gandalf speaks as in RK of            
 his sole hope for the sick resting in Aragorn, and quotes the words          
 of Yoreth.                                                                   
   When Aragorn encounters Berithil and Pippin at the door Pippin             
 says: 'Trotter! How splendid. There, Berithil, you see Denethor was          
 right after all.' The last sentence was struck out, and replaced by          
 Pippin's words in RK (p. 139): 'Do you know, I guessed it was you in         
 the black ships. But they were all shouting Corsairs and would not           
 listen to me. How did you do it?' And when Imrahil says to Eomer             
 'Yet perchance in some other name he will wear his crown', Aragorn           
 overhearing replies: 'Verily, for in the high tongue of eld I am Elessar,
 Elfstone, the renewer.'(13) Then lifting the green stone of Galadriel he         
 says: 'But Trotter shall be the name of my house, if ever that be            
 established; yet perhaps in the same high tongue it shall not sound so       
 ill, and tarakil (14) I will be and all the heirs of my body.'                   
   In the following passage the first section that I have enclosed in         
 square brackets is so enclosed in the manuscript, with a query against       
 it, though it was used in RK; the second section in square brackets has      
 a line drawn round it in the manuscript with a mark of deletion and a        
 query against it. In the fair copy the first is again put within square '
 brackets, and the second does not appear.                                    
                                                                             
   And so  they went  in. [And  as they  passed towards  the rooms            
 where the sick were  tended Gandalf  told of  the deeds  of Eowyn            
 and Meriadoc. 'For,' he said, 'long have I stood by them,  and at            
 first they spoke much in their sleep  dreaming, before  they sank            
 into a yet deeper darkness. Also it is  given to  me to  see many            
 things  afar  off.]  [And  when there  came a  ...(15) cry  from the            
 fields I was near to the walls and looked out. And even as I did,            
 the doom  long foretold  came to  pass, though  in a  manner that            
 had been hidden from  me. Not  by the  hand of  man was  the Lord            
 of the Nazgul doomed to fall, and in that doom placed  his trust.            
 But he was felled by a  woman and  with the  aid of  a halfling,(16)         
 and I heard the fading of his last cry borne away by the wind.']             
                                                                             
   It  will be  seen that  there were  major differences  in the  structure of
 the story as told in A from its form in RK. In the first place,  the distant.

  view of the battlefield seen by Pippin and Berithil from  the roof  of the
  Houses of Healing  is told  in direct  narrative, and  thus the  coming of
  the black fleet up Anduin  is repeated  from 'The  Battle of  the Pelennor
  Fields'.  Since  Pippin  and  Berithil were  present at  the House  of the
  Stewards  in  Rath  Dinen  they  had  heard  Denethor  accuse  Gandalf  of
  intriguing to displace him:  'But I  know your  mind and  its plots.  Do I
  not  see  the fleets  even now  coming up  Anduin! So  with the  left hand
  you would  use me  as a  shield against  Mordor, and  with the  right hand
  bring  up  this  Ranger  of the  North to  take my  place' (p.  378). This
  knowledge  Denethor  had  acquired  from  the  palantir.  The   idea  that
  Denethor  knew  that  Aragorn  was  in  command  of   the  ships   of  the
  Corsairs  was  changed  on  the  draft  manuscript  (G)  of  'The  pyre of
  Denethor' (p. 379), and in the fair copy of that chapter, already as first
  written,  his  knowledge  of  Aragorn  is  derived  as  in  RK   from  his
  conversations with Pippin: his sight of  the black  fleet becomes  for him
  an  overpowering  proof  of  the  futility  of  resistance to  Mordor. The
  present text must therefore have preceded the  fair copy  of 'The  Pyre of
  Denethor'.                                                                
    In the form of the story in  A Pippin  has a  reason for  declaring that
  Aragorn  is  coming  with the  fleet ('There,  Berithil, you  see Denethor
  was right after all', p. 390)  and for  shouting 'Here  comes the  heir of
  Elendil!'  when everyone  was crying  'The Corsairs  of Umbar!'  (p. 388);
  in RK he can  have no  reason at  all for  his words  to Aragorn  ('Do you
  know, I guessed it was you  in the  black ships'),  nothing but  a strange
  presentiment.                                                             
    In  the  second  place,  Gandalf  leaves  the  Houses  of  Healing  long
  before  sunset  and  disappears  on  Shadowfax.  Aragorn  does  not refuse
  to  enter Minas  Tirith with  Eomer and  Imrahil; and  thus he  is present
  at  the  door  of  the  Houses  of  Healing   when  Gandalf   comes  back,
  returning  alone  'up  the  road  from  Osgiliath' in  the dusk  (p. 389).
  Nothing is told of his errand  (but I  think it  can be  seen what  it was
  from the B version of this part of the story, to be given shortly). In the
  changed story he did not  leave the  Houses of  Healing until  sunset, and
  his errand was to bring Aragorn in from  outside the  walls: this  being a
  sudden  decision inspired  by the  words of  Yoreth. In  the A  version he
  does  not  appear  to take  any particular  account of  her words,  and he
  leaves  when  he  sees  that  'all  was  done  that could  be done  for the
  present'; yet when he returns he says as in RK  that 'only  in [Aragorn's]
  coming have I any hope for those that  lie within',  quoting the  words of
  Yoreth.                                                                   
    A  remarkable  short  text  evidently  belongs  to  this  phase  in  the
  development  of  the  story,  as  is seen  from the  fact that  Aragorn has
  entered the city without Gandalf,  who is  looking for  him. This  text is
  found  on  an  isolated  slip in  my father's  worst handwriting,  which he
  partly  elucidated  in  pencil  (with some  queries), and  slightly changed,
  in not quite his worst handwriting.                                        

                                                           
                                                                        
    'Did you ride with the Rohirrim?' said Gandalf.                      
    'Nay indeed,' said Legolas. 'A strange journey we have had           
  with  Aragorn  by  the  Paths  of  the Dead,  and we  came here  at the
  last  in  ships  taken  from  our foes.  Not often  has one  the chance
  to bring news to you, Gandalf!'                                        
    'Not  often,'  said  Gandalf  heavily.  'But  my  cares  are  many in
  these  days,  and  my  heart  is  sad.  I  am  growing  weary  at last,
  Gloin's  son,  as  this great  matter draws  to the  final edge  of its
  doom.  Alas!  alas!   How  our   Enemy  contrives   evil  out   of  our
  good.  For the  Lord of  the City  slew himself  in despair  seeing the
  black  fleet  approach.  For  the  coming  of the  fleet and  the sword
  of Elendil  secured the  victory but  gave the  last stroke  of despair
  to the Lord of the City.  But [?come],  I must  still labour.  Tell me,
  where is Aragorn? Is he in these tents?'                               
    'Nay,  he  has  gone  up into  the City,'  said Legolas,  'cloaked in
  grey and secretly.'                                                    
    'Then I must go,' said Gandalf.                                      
    'But  tell  us in  return one  thing first,'  said Gimli.  'Where are
  those young friends of  ours who  cost us  such great  pains? It  is to
  be hoped that they were not [?worsted] and they are still alive.'      
    'One  is  lying  grievously  sick in  the City  after a  great deed,'
  said Gandalf, 'and the other stays beside him.'                        
    'Then may we come with you?' said Gimli.                             
    'You may indeed!' said Gandalf.                                      
                                                                        
    This encounter on the fields of  the Pelennor  was lost,  and nowhere
  else is Gandalf's meeting with Legolas and Gimli  after they  parted at
  Dol Baran recorded.                                                    
    As the fair  copy B  was first  written, Gandalf's  earlier departure
  from the Houses of Healing and the scene in  which Berithil  and Pippin
  see the black fleet from  the roof  were retained;(17) but there  are two
  significant  differences.  After Yoreth's  words it  is now  said: 'But
  Gandalf hearing this saying, and seeing that all was done that could be
  done  by  the  leechcraft  of  Gondor,  arose  and  went out';  and the
  conversation of Berithil and Pippin is now changed:                    
                                                                        
    'Look,  look,  Berithil!'  he  cried.  'The  Lord  did  not  see only
  visions  of  madness.  Here  come  the  ships  up  the  River  that  he
  spoke of. What are they?'                                              
    'Alas!'   answered   Berithil.   'Now  I   can  almost   forgive  his
  despair. 1 know the fashion of these  ships and  their sails,  for that
  is  the  duty  of  all  watchmen.   They  come   from  Umbar   and  the
  Haven of the Corsairs! Hark!'                                          

   And   all   about   them   men   were   now   crying  in   dismay:  'The
 Corsairs of Umbar!'                                                       
   Pippin's  heart  sank.  It  seemed  bitter  to  him  that after  the joy
 of  the  horns  at  dawn  hope  should  be  destroyed  again.   'I  wonder
 where   Gandalf   has   gone,'   he  thought.   And  then   another  ques-
 tion  arose  in  his  mind:  'Aragorn:  where  is   he?  He   should  have
 come with the Rohirrim, but he doesn't seem to have done so.'             
   'Berithil,'  he   said,  'I   wonder:  could   there  be   any  mistake?
 What  if  this   was  really   Aragorn  with   the  Broken   Sword  coming
 in the nick of time?'                                                     
   'If so, he is coming in the ships of our enemies,' said Berithil.       
                                                                          
   It  seems  that  Pippin's  thought  here,  'I  wonder where  Gandalf has
 gone' giving  rise to  the question  'Aragorn: where  is he?',  taken with
 the  more  explicit  statement  concerning  Gandalf's departure,  makes it
 certain that  he had  gone, as  in the  later story,  to find  Aragorn and
 (because 'the hands of the king are the hands of a  healer') to  bring him
 urgently  to  the  Houses  of  Healing.(18) But why  Gandalf did  not return
 till dusk, after Aragorn had entered the city, is not explained.          
   At  this  point  my  father  struck  from  the  B  manuscript  all  that
 followed  'and then  passed to  silence and  a deadly  cold, and  so died'
 (RK p. 136;  see p.  387) and  replaced it  with the  text that  stands in
 RK, with  Gandalf leaving  the Houses  of Healing  at sunset,  his thought
 and   purpose   now  perfectly   plain:  'Men   may  long   remember  your
 words,  Yoreth;  for  there  is  hope  in  them. Maybe  a king  has indeed
 returned  to  Gondor;  or  have  you  not heard  the strange  tidings that
 have come to the City?' To the point  we have  reached in  A ('Also  it is
 given to me to see many things afar off', p. 390) the  fair copy  B (apart
 from  the  passage  concerning  Theoden's  Howe  at Edoras  already cited,
 and a few points that are mentioned in the notes) then has the text of RK.
   The  latter  part  of  the  chapter  in  A  was written  with remarkable
 fluency - or, at any rate, the  text as  it stands  in this  original draft (19)
 was  scarcely  changed  afterwards.  The  only  notable   divergence  from
 RK  is  found  in  the  passage  where Aragorn,  Eomer, and  Gandalf speak
 beside  Eowyn's  bed;  for  while  the  actual  words of  RK (p.  143) are
 present,  what   became  Gandalf's   speech  is   given  to   Aragorn.  He
 begins:  'My  friend,  you  had  horses  and  deeds  of  arms   ...',  and
 continues  to  '...  a  hutch  to  trammel  some  wild  thing  in?' (where
 Gandalf  ceases  in  RK),  and  then  (without  the  sentence  'Then Eomer
 was silent, and looked on his sister, as  if pondering  anew all  the days
 of their past life together') goes on, from the point  where he  begins in
 RK: 'I  saw  also  what  you  saw.  And  few  other  griefs  amid  the ill
 chances  of  this  world  ...' Above  'said Aragorn'  at the  beginning of
 the speech  my  father wrote,  almost certainly  while still  writing this

  manuscript,   'Gandalf?';   and   subsequently  he   made  in   pencil  the
  changes that give the passage the form that it has in RK.                  
    Beyond  this  there  are  only  details to  mention. The  herb-master, in
  his  discourse  concerning  the plant  kingsfoil, declares  it to  be named
  athelas  'in  the  noble  tongue,  or  to  those who  know somewhat  of the
  Numenorean  -  ',  'Numenorean'  being   changed  later   both  on   A  and
  on  B  to  'Valinorian'  (and  afterwards  to  'Valinorean');  and  Aragorn
  replies:  'I  do so,  and care  not whether  you say  now asea  aranaite or
  kingsfoil,  so  long  as  you   have  some.'   The  form   aranaite  became
  aranion on the final typescript.                                           
    When  Aragorn  leaves  Merry  (RK  p. 146)  he says:  'May the  Shire for
  ever  live  unwithered  and  unchanged.  For  this,  maybe,  more  than all
  else, I hope and labour';(20) the last  part of  this, from  'and unchanged',
  being struck from the fair copy.(21)                                       
    The  chapter  in  A  ended  with  Gandalf's  words  with  the  Warden  of
  the  Houses  of  Healing:  '"They   are  a   remarkable  race,"   said  the
  Warden,  nodding his  head. "Very  tough in  the fibre,  I deem."  "It goes
  deeper  than  the  fibre,"  said  Gandalf.' The  conclusion of  the chapter
  in  RK  is  roughed out  in a  pencilled text  that was  subsequently over-
  written  by  material belonging  to 'The  Last Debate'  (cf. note  19), but
  some of it can be read. Where the fair copy B has  (as in  RK) 'and  so the
  name which it was  foretold at  his birth  that he  should bear  was chosen
  by  his  own  people',  this first  draft has  'and so  his own  choice was
  fulfilled [?in] the title chosen long before.' The final passage is largely
  illegible,  but  the following  can be  seen: 'And  [?in the  morning] when
  he  had  slept  a  little  he  arose  and  ..... called  a council  and the
  captains  met  in  a  chamber  of  the  Tower  ...' The  fair copy  ends as
  does the chapter  in RK,  with Aragorn  leaving the  city just  before dawn
  and going to his tent; and  pencilled beneath  the last  words of  the text
  is this note: 'Aragorn will not go in the City  again. So  Imrahil, Gandalf
  and Eomer hold council [in the] tents with the sons of Elrond.'            

                              NOTES.                                     
                                                                        
 1. and the mist before his  eyes cleared  a little:  this was  added after
    the 'a' part of the text was written and joined on to 'b'.              
 2. This  passage  is  enclosed  within  square  brackets  in   the  manu-
    script.                                                                 
 3. A first illegible word here almost certainly begins res and ends ed,
    but cannot as it stands be read as resisted. A second word could ?     
    be 'the' or 'his'.                                                      
 4. For a previous mention of Finduilas Elrond's daughter see p. 370-     
 5. Cf. the first narrative text (A) of the chapter, p. 389: 'I come only
    as Aragorn Lord of the Rangers of Forod.'                               

  6.  and tells of Theoden's fall: i.e. (I take it) the manner of Theoden's
      fall,  of  which  Gandalf  knew  (cf.  the  second passage  in square
      brackets on p. 390).                                                 
  7.  The first  text A  was paginated  continuously on  from 'The  Pyre of
      Denethor',  as also  was the  fair copy  B. At  some point  my father
      wrote  on  the opening  page of  'The Houses  of Healing'  (this page
      being  common   to  both   texts)  the   chapter  number   'L',  i.e.
      separating  it  from  'The Pyre  of Denethor';  but the  number 'XLIX
      (b)', following 'XLIX (a)'  for 'The  Pyre of  Denethor' (see  p. 382
      note  5),  again  makes  them  subdivisions  of  a   single  chapter,
      without an overall title.                                            
  8.  The  word  might,  just  possibly,  be  'crewmen'.  B  has  'fashion'
      (p. 392).                                                            
  9.  Halbarad  was  named  among  the  slain in  the original  drafting of
      'The    Battle     of    the     Pelennor    Fields'     (p.  371).
 10.  be  removed  the  crown  and stars:  the word  'and' was  struck out;
      the  replacement  is  illegible, but  may be  'of' with  another word
      struck out,  i.e. 'crown  of stars'.  In B  this becomes  simply 'the
      crown'; altered on the first typescript  to 'the  crown of  the North
      Kingdom', this survived into the proof,  on which  it was  altered to
      'the Star  of the  North Kingdom'.  Cf. 'The  Battle of  the Pelennor
      Fields', p.  370, where  'about his  helm there  was a  kingly crown'
      was  replaced  on  the  proof  by  'upon  his  brow  was the  Star of
      Elendil'.                                                            
 11.  Cf. RK p. 138 (at a different point in the narrative): 'I am  but the
      Captain  of  the  Dunedain of  Arnor'. In  the fair  copy manuscript,
      at the same point  in the  narrative as  in RK,  Aragorn says:  'I am
      but the Captain of the Rangers of Forod'.                            
 12.  In the first text A the verse is in modern English in the  same words
      as  in  the  outline  on  p.  385.  In both  A and  B the  passage is
      enclosed in square brackets.                                         
 13.  In B the  text remained  almost the  same: 'Verily,  for in  the high
      tongue  of  old I  am Elessar,  the Elfstone,  and the  Renewer', and
      this  is  the  reading  of  the First  Edition of  LR. In  the Second
      Edition    Envinyatar    was    added    before     'the    Renewer'.
 14.  tarakil: the fourth letter (a) is not certain, but is  very probable,
      especially in view  of the  form in  B, where  the text  remained the
      same  as  in  A  but  with   Tarakon  here.   This  was   altered  to
      Tarantar,  which  survived into  the first  typescript, where  it was
      altered to Telkontar (> Telcontar on the proof).                     
 15.  The word begins with gr(e), but is certainly not great.  Possibly the
      word intended was great, but the  last letters,  which look  like ry,
      were due to the following word cry.                                  
 l6.  On the doom of the Lord of the Nazgul see pp. 334 - 5, 368.          
 17.  It is said of Bergil and his friends  in this  version (see  p. 388):
      'When the fire-bolts had fallen in the City they  had been  sent [to]

 the upper circle;  but the  fair house  in the  Street of  the Lamp-
 wrights had been destroyed.'                                        
18.  Cf. also the brief outline given on p. 386: 'Where is Gandalf? He
 comes in late and tells of Theoden's fall, and Yoreth's words.'     
19.  A part of the conclusion of the chapter, from '".He  [Merry] lies
 nearby in this house, and I must go to him,"  said Gandalf'  to 'For
 I have not slept  in such  a bed  since I  rode from  Dunharrow, nor
 eaten  since  the dark  before dawn'  (RK pp.  145 -  6), is  in fact
 extant in  a preliminary  pencilled text,  subsequently over-written
 by a text in ink that  belongs to  the story  of 'The  Last Debate'.
 This draft,  most of  which has  been read  by Taum  Santoski, shows
 no significant differences from the more finished version in A.     
20.  Cf. Aragorn's words to Halbarad at Helm's Deep, p. 306.          
21.  I collect here  a few  other details.  For 'whether  Aragorn had
 indeed some  forgotten power of  Westernesse' (RK  p. 144)  A, and
 at first  B,  had  'art  or  wizardry'.  The  name  Imloth  Melui in
 Yoreth's recollection of  her youth  (RK p.  142) appears  thus from
 the first; and as  in RK  (p. 146)  Aragorn says  to Merry  that the
 herb-master will tell him  that tobacco  is called  'westmansweed by
 the vulgar, and  galenas by  the noble',  where the  pencilled draft
 that  is  extant  for  this  portion  of the  chapter (note  19) has
 'pipeweed' and 'sweet galenas'. For the name galenas see p. 38.     

                                  XII.                                
                                                                      
                             THE LAST DEBATE.                           
                                                                      
 At some time before he began work on  this chapter  my father  set down
 an  outline  entitled  'The  march  of  Aragorn  and  defeat  of  [the]
 Haradrim.'  This  must  have  preceded  'The  Battle  of  the  Pelennor
 Fields', since the name  Haramon appears,  not Emyn  Arnen (see  p. 370
 and note 11);(1) it was almost certainly a companion to the  outline 'The
 Story Foreseen from  Forannest' (pp.  359 ff.),  but is  obviously best
 given here. At the head of the  page my  father afterwards  pencilled a
 note asking whether it might not be a good idea 'to  have part  of this
 told  by  a  man  of  Morthond Vale',  but nothing  ever came  of this.
 .Pencilled changes made to the text are shown.                        
                                                                      
  Aragorn   takes   'Paths   of   the   Dead'   morning   of   8  March,
 passes  tunnels  of  mountains.  (This  tale  will have  to be  told in
 brief  later,  probably  at  feast  of  victory  in  Minas Tirith  - by
 Gimli  and/or  Legolas.)  They  see  skeleton  in  armour   of  Bealdor
 son  of  Brego.(2) But  except  for  dark  and  a  feeling of  dread meet
 no  evil.  The  tunnels  become  the   issuing  caverns   of  Morthond.
 It  is  dusk  [>   afternoon]  of   8  March   when  Aragorn   and  his
 company  come  out  into  the  uplands  of  the  head  of  the  Vale of
 Morthond,.  and  ride  to  Stone  of  Erech.(3) This  was a  black stone,
 according  to  legend  brought  from  Numenor,  set  up  to   mark  the
 meeting  place  of  Isildur  and  Anarion  with  the  last king  of the
 dark  men  of  the  Mountains,  who  swore  allegiance  to the  sons of
 Elendil,  vowing  to  aid  them and  their kin  for ever,  'even though
 Death  should  take  us.'  The  stone  was  enclosed  in  a  now ruined
 ring-wall  and  beside  it  the  Gondorians  had  anciently  erected  a
 tower,  and  there  had  been  kept  one  of  the  palantiri.   No  men
 went  near  the  tower.  Rumour  of  terror  flies  through  the vales,
 for  the  'King  of  the  Dead'  has  come  back  -  and  behold behind
 the  living  men  a  great  host  of   shadow-men,  some   riding  some
 striding but all moving like the wind, are seen.                      
  Aragorn   goes   to   Erech   at  midnight,   blows  horns   (and  dim
 shadow  horns  echo   him)  and   unfurls  banner.   The  star   on  it
 shines  in  the dark.  He finds  the palantir  (unsullied) buried  in a
 vault.  From  Erech  he  sets  out  [added:  dark]  morn  of   March  9
 [added:  at   5  a.m.].   For  [read   From  ?]   Erech  to   Fords  of
 Lameduin  (say  Linhir?)  is  175  miles  direct,  about  200  by road.(4)

 Great  terror  and wonder  precedes his  march. At  Linhir on            
 Lameduin  men  of  Lebennin  and  Lamedon are  defending pas-            
 sage of river against Haradwaith.  Aragorn reaches  Linhir at            
 evening on March 10 after two days and night[s] forced riding            
 with host of shadow behind in the  deepening dark  of Mordor.            
 All fly before him. Aragorn crosses Lameduin into Lebennin at            
 morning  of  March  11  and hastens  to Pelargir  [added: 100            
 miles].(5)                                                               
                                                                         
   From  this  point  the  outline,  becoming very  rough, was  struck out
 and replaced, immediately, by a new text on the reverse  of the  sheet of
 paper.  At  the  head  of  this  page  is  the  following  brief  passage
 concerning  Frodo and  Sam, which  (while certainly  written at  the same
 time  as  the  outline  of  Aragorn's  journey)  probably  already  stood
 there:                                                                   
                                                                         
   Rescue  of  Frodo.  Frodo  is  lying  naked  in  the  Tower;   but  Sam
 finds  by  some  chance  that  the elven-cloak  of Lorien  is lying  in a
 corner.   When   they   disguise   themselves  they   put  on   the  grey
 cloaks  over  all  and  become  practically  invisible  -  in  Mordor the
 cloaks of the Elves become like a dark mantle of shadow.                 
                                                                         
   Then follows, returning to the outline:                                
                                                                         
   Aragorn   crosses   into   Lebennin   on   March  11th   (morning)  and
 rides  with  all  speed  to  Pelargir  -  the  Shadow  Host  follows.  The
 Haradrim  fly  before   him  in   dismay.  Some   hearing  news   of  his
 coming  in  time  get  their  ships  off  and  escape  down  Anduin,  but
 most  are  not  manned.  Early  on  12th  Aragorn  comes  on   the  fleet
 driving   all  before   him.  Many   of  the   ships  are   stuffed  with
 captives,  and  they  are   partly  manned   (especially  the   oars)  by
 captives   taken   in   raids   on   Gondor,   or   slave-descendants  of
 captives   taken  long   before.  These   revolt.  So   Aragorn  captures
 many   ships   and   mans   them,   though   several   are   burned.   He
 works  feverishly  because  he  knows  that  doom  of  Minas   Tirith  is
 near,  if  he  does  not  come  in  time.  That  night  the  Shadow  Host
 vanishes  and  goes  back   into  the   mountain  valleys,   and  finally
 disappears  into  the  Paths  of  the  Dead  and is  never seen  again to
 come forth.(6)                                                           
   He  sets  out  at  6   a.m.  on   13  March,   rowing.  On   the  south
 plain  of  Lebennin  the  Anduin  is  very  broad  (5  -  7   miles)  and
 slow.  So  with  many  oars  they  make  about  4   miles  an   hour  and
 by  6  a.m.  on  14th are  100 miles  on way.  It is  125 miles  by river
 from   Pelargir   to   that   place  where   Anduin  takes   a  west-loop
 round  the  feet  of  Haramon,  a  great  hill  in  South  Ithilien,  and

 bends  into  the  Pelennor,  so  that  here  the  Ramas-Coren  is   but  15
 [>  5]  miles  from  the  City,(7) and  stands  right  on  the  water  brink.
 Just  before  that  point   the  river   course  runs   nearly  North-South
 (slightly  N.W.)  and  points  straight  towards   Minas  Tirith   so  that
 watchers can see that reach - about 10 miles long.(8)                       
   On   morning   of   the   15th   [written   above:   14]  a   wind  rises
 [added:   at   dawn)   and  freshens   from  S.W.   The  cloud   and  gloom
 begins  to  roll  back.  They  hoist   sails  and   now  go   with  [struck
 out:  more]   speed.  About   9  a.m.   they  can   be  seen   by  watchers
 from   Minas   Tirith   who    are   dismayed.    As   soon    as   Aragorn
 catches  sight  of  the  city,  and of  the enemy,  he hoists  his standard
 (the   White   Crown   with   the  stars   of  Sun   and  Moon   on  either
 hand:  Elendil's  badge).(9) A  sun-gleam   from  the   S.E.  lights   it  up
 and  it  shines  afar  like  white  fire.  Aragorn  lands  and  drives  off
 enemy.                                                                      
                                                                            
   Especially notable here is  the recurrence  of the  idea that  appeared in
 'Many  Roads  Lead  Eastward'  (pp.  300,  etc.):  there  was a  palantir at
 Erech  (in  the  earlier chapter  Aragorn seemed  to say  that the  Stone of
 Erech was itself the palantir,  p. 309  note 10).  This Stone  replaced that
 of Aglarond (pp. 76 - 8), so  that there  were still  five palantiri  in the
 South.                                                                      
                                                                            
   When  my  father  came  to  write   the  chapter   his  intention   -  and
 achievement  -  was  that  in  it should  be recounted  not only  the debate
 of  the  commanders following  the Battle  of the  Pelennor Fields  but also
 the  story  of  the  journey  of  the  Grey  Company  as recounted  by Gimli
 and  Legolas  to  Merry  and  Pippin  - and  that it  should then  carry the
 story  on  to  the  arrival of  the Host  of the  West before  the Morannon.
 The  manuscript,  or  manuscript  corpus,   was  originally   entitled  'The
 Parley at the Black  Gate'.(10) It  was a  huge labour  to achieve  the final
 arrangement,  entailing  draft  upon  draft  upon   draft,  with   the  most
 complicated  re-use  of  existing  pages,  or  parts  of  them,  as  he  ex-
 perimented  with  different  solutions  to  the  structural  problem.  It is
 more   than   likely   that  when   this  great   mass  of   manuscript  and
 typescript  left  his  hands  it  was  already  in  dire confusion,  and its
 subsequent  ordering  into  wholly  factitious  textual  entities   made  it
 seem  that in  'The Last  Debate' my  attempt to  discern the  true sequence
 of  the  writing of  The Lord  of the  Rings would  finally founder.  But it
 has  proved  otherwise,  and  since  no  significant  element seems  to have
 been  lost  out  of  the  whole  complex  the  sequence  of  development  in
 fact emerges here at least as clearly as in some far less difficult parts of
 the narrative.  But of  course to  describe in  detail each  textual pathway
 would demand far more space than can be allowed to it.                      
   It  seems  that  before  my  father  began  the  coherent drafting  of the

  chapter - while he was in fact still writing 'The Houses of Healing' - he
  set down a form of the speeches  at the  opening of  the debate  that had
  arisen in his mind and would  not be  postponed.(11) Since  a great  deal of
  this does not appear in RK 1 give it in full.                            
                                                                          
    'My  lords,'  said  Gandalf.   '"Go  forth   and  fight!   Vanity!  You
  may  triumph  on  the  fields  of  Pelennor  for a  day. But  against the
  Power  that  now  arises  there  is  no  victory."  So  said  the Steward
  of  this  City  before  he  died.  And   though  I   do  not   bring  you
  counsels  of  despair,  yet  ponder  the  truth  in  this. The  people of
  the  West  are  diminished;  far  and  wide  the  lands  lie  empty.  And
  it  is  long  since  your  rule retreated  and left  the wild  peoples to
  themselves,   and  they   do  not   know  you;   and  [they]   will  come
  seeking  new  lands  to  dwell  in.  Now  were  it  but  a matter  of war
  between  Men,  such  as  has  been  for  many  ages,  I  would  say:  You
  are  now  too  few  to  march  East  either  in  wrath or  friendship, to
  subdue  or  to  teach.  Yet   you  might   take  thought   together,  and
  make   such   boundaries,   and   such   forts   and    strongholds,   as
  could   long   be  maintained   and  restrain   the  gathering   tide  [>
  ?wild].  But  your  war  is   not  only   against  numbers,   and  swords
  and  spears,  and   untamed  peoples.   You  have   an  Enemy   of  great
  power  and  malice,  and  he  grows,  and  he  it  is  that fills  all the
  hearts  of  the  wild  peoples  with  hate,   and  directs   and  governs
  that  hatred,  and  so  they  are  become  no  longer  like   waves  that
  may  roll   at  whiles   against  your   battiements,  to   be  withstood
  with  valour  and  defeated  with  forethought.  They  are  rising  in, a
  great  tide   to  engulf   you.  What   then  shall   you  do?   Seek  to
  overthrow your Enemy.'                                                   
    'Overlate  should  we  begin   that  task!'  said   Prince  Imrahil.
  '[Had  Minas  Morgul  been  destroyed  in  ages   past,  and   the  watch
  upon   the  Black   Gate  maintained   We  slept,   and  no   sooner  had
  he  re-entered  the  Nameless  Land]   We  slept,   and  awoke   to  find
  him  already  grown   beyond  our   measure.  And   to  destroy   him  we
  must overthrow first all the allies that he has gathered.'               
    'That  is  true,'  said  Gandalf.  'And  their  numbers are  too great,
  as   Denethor   indeed  saw.   Therefore  this   war  is   without  final
  hope,  whether  you  sit  here  to  endure  siege  upon  siege,  or march
  out   to   be    overwhelmed   beyond    the   River.    Prudence   would
  counsel  you  to  await onset  in strong  places, for  so at  least shall
  the time before the end be made a little longer.                         
    'But  now  into  the  midst  of  all  these counsels  of war  comes the
  Ring.  Here  is  a  thing  which  could  command  victory  even   in  our
  present plight.'                                                         

              
                                                                  
  'I have heard only rumour of this,' said Imrahil. 'Is it not said
 the One Ring of Sauron of  old has  come back  to light,  and that
 if he regain it then he will be as mighty  as he  was in  the Dark
 Years?'                                                           
  'It is said so and said truly,' answered  Gandalf. 'Only  he will
 be  more  mighty  than of  old and  more secure.  For there  is no
 longer  any  land  beyond  the  Sea  from  which  help  may  come;
 [and  those  who dwell  beyond even  the West  will not  move, for
 they have committed the Great Lands to the keeping of Men.]'(12)  
  'But if we should find the Ring and wield it,  how would  it give
 us victory?' asked Imrahil.                                       
  'It would not do so all in  a day,'  answered Gandalf.  'But were
 it to come to the hand of some one of power [?or] royalty,  as say
 the  Lord  Aragorn,  or  the Steward  of this  City, or  Elrond of
 Imladrist,(13) or  even  to  me,  then he  being the  Ringlord would
 wax  ever  in  power and  the desire  of power;  and all  minds he
 would cow  or dominate  so that  they would  blindly do  his will.
 And he could not be slain. More: the deepest  secrets of  the mind
 and  heart  of  Sauron  would  become  plain to  him, so  that the
 Dark  Lord  could  do  nothing  unforeseen.  The   Ringlord  would
 suck  the  very  power  and thought  from him,  so that  all would
 forsake his  allegiance and  follow the  Ringlord, and  they would
 serve  him  and  worship  him  as a  God. And  so Sauron  would be
 overthrown  utterly  and  fade  into  oblivion; but  behold, there
 would be Sauron still  ..... but  upon the  other side,  [a tyrant
 brooking no freedom, shrinking from no  deed of  evil to  hold his
 sway and to widen it].'                                           
 'And worse,' said Aragorn. 'For all  thar is  left of  the ancient
 power  and  wisdom  of  the  West  he would  also have  broken and
 corrupted.'                                                       
  'Then what is the use of this Ring?' said Imrahil.               
  'Victory,'  said  [Gandalf  >]  Hurin  Warden  of the  Keys.(14) 'At
 least  we  should  have won  the war,  and not  this foul  lord of
 Mordor.'                                                          
  'So  might  many  a  brave  knight  of  the  Mark  or  the  Realm
 speak,'  said  Imrahil.  'But  surely more  wisdom is  required of
 lords in council. Victory  is in  itself worthless.  Unless Gondor
 stand for some good, then let it not stand at  all; and  if Mordor
 doth not stand  for some  evil that  we will  not brook  in Mordor
 or out of it, then let it triumph.'                               
  'Triumph it will, say or do what we will, or  so it  seems,' said
 : Hurin. 'But after many words  still I  do not  hear what  is our

 present  purpose.  Surely,  it  is  but  a  plain  choice  between staying
 here  and  marching  forth.   And  if   those  who   are  wiser   or  more
 farsighted  than  I  tell  me  there  is  no  long[er]  hope   in  waiting
 here,  then  I  for  one  am  for  marching  forth,  and  taking  doom  by
 the  outstretched  hand.  So  we  may  give  it  a  wrench  at  the  least
 before it grips us.'                                                      
   'And   in   this   at   any   rate  I   approve  Hurin's   words,'  said
 Gandalf.  'For  all  my  speech   was  leading   to  just   such  counsel.
 This  is  not  a  war  for  victory  that  cannot  be  won  by   arms.(15) I
 have  rejected  the  use  of  the  Ring,  for  that  would   make  victory
 the  same  as  defeat.  I  have  (like  a  fool,  said  Denethor)  set the
 Ring  at  a  great  risk that  our Enemy  will regain  it, and  so utterly
 overwhelm  us;  for  to  retain  it would  he to  risk the  certainty that
 ere  the  last  throes  came  upon  us  one  among   us  would   take  it,
 and  so bring  about at  least as  great an  evil. But  still we  have set
 our  hands  to  war.  For  resist  we  must  while  we  have   strength  -
 and  hope.  But  now  our  salvation,  if  any   can  be   achieved,  does
 not  rest  upon  our  deeds  of  arms,  yet  it  may  be  aided  by  them.
 Not  by  prudence,  as  I  say,  of  the  lesser  wars  of  Men. But  by a
 boldness,  even  a  rashness,  that  in  other  case  would be  folly. For
 our  hope  is  still,  though  daily  it  grows  fainter, that  Sauron has
 not  recovered  the  Ring,  and  while  that  is  so he  will be  in doubt
 and  fear  lest  we  have  it. The  greater our  rashness the  greater his
 fear,  and  the  more  will  his  eye  and  thought  be  turned to  us and
 not  elsewhere  where  his  true  peril  is.  Therefore  I  say  we should
 follow  up  this  victory  as  soon  as  we  may  and  move East  with all
 such force as we have.'                                                   
   'Yet  still   there  must   be  prudence,'   said  Imrahil.   'There  is
 scarce  a  man  or  horse  alive  among  us  that   is  not   weary,  even
 those  that  are  not  sick  or  hurt.  And  we  learn  that  there  is an
 army   left   unfought   upon   our   north   flank.   We   cannot  wholly
 denude the city, or it will burn behind us.'                              
   'True  enough,  I  would   not  counsel   it,'  said   Gandalf.  'Indeed
 for  my  design  the  force  me  lead  East  need  not  be   great  enough
 for  any  assault  in  earnest  upon  Mordor,  so  long  as  it  is  great
 enough to challenge a battle.'                                            
                                                                          
   Turning now to the  primary manuscript  of the  chapter, this  is itself
 a massive  complex of  rejected and  retained material,  but it  cannot be
 satisfactorily separated into distinct 'layers', and I shall treat it as a
 single entity, referring to it as 'the manuscript'.                       
   The  opening  achieves  almost  word  for  word  the   form  in   RK  pp
 148  -  9,  beginning  'The  morning  came  after the  day of  battle' and

                                                                 
                                                                       
 continuing as far as Gimli s remark to Legolas: It is ever so  with all
 the things that Men begin: there is a frost  in spring,  or a  blight in
 summer, and  they fail  of their  promise.' A  servant of  Imrahil then
 guided  them  to  the  Houses of  Healing, where  they found  Merry and
 Pippin in the garden, 'and  the meeting  of those  friends was  a merry
 one.'  The  narrative then  moves directly  into the  debate: as  in RK
 (p. 154) Imrahil and  Eomer went  down from  the city  to the  tents of
 Aragorn,  and  there  conferred  with  Gandalf,  Aragorn,  Elrohir  and
 Elladan. 'They made Gandalf their chief  and prayed  him to  speak first
 his  mind';  and as  in RK  he began  by citing  the words  of Denethor
 before his death, bidding his listeners ponder the  truth of  them. But
 now he went on, following  and condensing  a passage  in the  draft just
 given:                                                                 
                                                                       
 'The  peoples  of  the  West  are  diminished;  and  it  is  long since
 . your  rule retreated  and left  the wild  peoples to  themselves; and
 they  do  not  know  you,  and   neither  love   nor  fear   will  long
 restrain   them.   And   you  have   an  Enemy   of  great   power  and
 malice,  who  fills  all  their  hearts  with  hatred, and  governs and
 directs  that  hatred,  so  that  they  are no  longer like  waves that
 roll  at  whiles  against  your  walls  to be:thrown  back one  by one:
 they are united, and they are rising as a great tide to engulf you.
    'The  Stones  of  Seeing  do  not  lie,  and  not  even the  Lord of
 Barad-dur can make them do so ...'                                     
                                                                       
  The  remainder  of  Gandalf's  speech,   with  the   interventions  of
 Imrahil,(16) Aragorn,  and  Eomer,  was  achieved  through  a  series  of
 drafts that need scarcely be  considered more  closely, except  for one
 version of Gandalf's reply to Eomer (RK pp.  155 -  6). In  this, after
 saying  that  the  Dark  Lord, not  knowing whether  they themselves
 possessed the Ring, would look for those signs  of strife  that would
 inevitably arise among them if they did, Gandalf goes on:              
                                                                       
 'Now  it  is  known  to  you  that  I  have  set  the  Ring  in  peril.
 From  Faramir  we  learn  that  it  passed  to  the  very   borders  of
 Mordor before  this assault  began, maybe  on the  first day  of the
 darkness. And,  my lords,  it went  by the  may of  Morgul. Slender
 indeed is the hope that  the bearer  can have  escaped the  perils of
 that way, of the horrors that wait there; still less is the hope that
 even  if  he  comes  through  them  to  the  Black  Land  he  can  pass
 there  unmarked.  Six  days  have  gone,  and   hourly  I   watch  the
 signs with great dread in my heart.'                                       
    'What  are  these  signs  that  you  loot  for,  an  enemy  ...  you
 on our ...' asked Imrahil.                                                

   'Darkness,'  said  Gandalf.  'That  is  my dread.  And darkness          
 began, and therefore for  a while  I felt  a despair  deeper than          
 Denethor. But the darkness that is to be feared is not such as we          
 have endured: it would need no clouds in the air; it  would begin          
 in our hearts feeling afar the  power of  the Ringlord,  and grow          
 till by sunlight or moonlight or under heaven  or under  roof all          
 would seem dark to us.  This darkness  was but  a device  to make          
 us despair and it has, as such deceits will, ..... our enemy. The          
 next sign is strife among the lords.'                                      
                                                                           
   A  following  draft  reaches  Gandalf's  argument  as  it appears  in RK,
 but here he adds to those  signs that  Sauron will  have observed:  'He may
 also have seen in  the Stone  the death  of Denethor,  and since  he judges
 all by himself  he may  well deem  that a  first sign  of strife  among his
 chief foes.' In the same text, after saying that 'we must at all costs keep
 his eye  from his  true peril',  he adds:  'A single  regiment of  orcs set
 about  Orodruin  could seal  our ruin'  (in a  subsequent version:  'A mere
 handful of orcs at watch on Orodruin would seal our doom').                
   At  the end  of the  debate, following  Aragorn's words  (RK p.  158) 'no
 gates  will  endure  against  our  Enemy  if men  desert them',  an initial
 draft has a development that was not pursued:                              
                                                                           
   Then  even  as  they   debated  a   rider  came   in  search   of  Eomer.
 'Lord,'   he  said,   'word  has   come  from   Anorien  from   the  north-
 roads.   Theoden  King,   when  we   rode  hither,   left  men   behind  to
 watch   the   movements   of   enemy   at   Amon   Din.   They   send  word
 that  there  has  been  war  far  away  in  the   Wold,  and   thence  come
 strange  tidings.  For   some  say   [the  very   woods  have]   that  wild
 things  of  the  woods  have  fallen  on  the  orcs  and  driven  them into
 the  River  and  the  rapids  of  Sarn  Gebir.  But   the  army   that  was
 on  the  road  has  heard  this  news,  and  also  of  our   victory  here,
 and is afraid, and is even now hastening back.'                            
   'Ha!'  said  Eomer.  'If  they dare  to assail  us they  will rue  it. If
 they  seek  to  fly  past  they  shall  be  smitten. We  must cut  off this
 finger of the Black Hand ere it is withdrawn.'                             
                                                                           
   The  numbers  of  those  who  should  set  out  from  Minas  Tirith  were
 differently conceived, for 'the great part  of these  should be  horsed for
 swifter  movement'  (in  contrast  to  RK:  'the great  part of  this force
 should  be  on  foot,  because  of  the  evil lands  into which  they would
 go'):  Eomer  leading  three  thousand  of   the  Rohirrim,   Aragorn  five
 hundred  horse  and  fifteen  hundred  foot, and  Imrahil a  thousand horse
 and  fifteen  hundred  foot;  and there  was no  suggestion that  any force
 of  the  Rohirrim  were sent  to 'waylay  the West  Road against  the enemy
 that   was  in   Anorien'  (RK   p.  158).   The  manuscript   was  however

                                                                   
                                                                         
 subsequently  corrected  and  the  muster  as  enumerated  in  RK  intro-
 duced, with three thousand of the Rohirrim left behind.                  
   After  the  words  'And  he  drew  forth  Branding   and  held   it  up
 glittering in the sun' (which  is where  in RK  'The Last  Debate' ends),
 the original chapter  then continues  with a  transition back  to Legolas
 and Gimli:  'While  the  great  captains  thus  debated  and  laid  their
 designs, Legolas and  Gimli made  merry in  the fair  morning high  up in
 the windy circles of  Minas Tirith.'  Legolas' sight  of the  gulls flying
 up  Anduin  follows,  and  the  emotion  that  they  stirred in  him, are
 described in much  the same  words as  in RK;  but the  conversation that
 follows is altogether different. At this stage no account had  been given
 of the Paths of the Dead; in the outline at the beginning of this chapter
 (p. 397) my father had suggested that the story would  be told  'at feast
 of victory  in Minas  Tirith', and  had mentioned  that in  tunnels under
 the mountains  the  company  saw  the  'skeleton  in  armour  of  Bealdor
 son of Brego', but that except for the dark and a  feeling of  dread they
 met no evil.                                                             
   There is at first both a draft and a more finished  version; I  give the
 latter, since it follows the former very closely.                        
                                                                         
 '... No peace shall I have again in Middle-earth!'
   'Say not so!' said Gimli. 'There are countless things still to see
 there, and great work to be done. But if all the Fair Folk, that
 are also wise, take to the Havens, it will become a duller world
 for those that are doomed to stay.'
   'It is already rather dull,' said Merry, sitting and swinging his
 legs as he sat on the brink of the wall. 'At least it is for hobbits,
 cooped up in a stone city, and troubled with wars, while their
 visitors talk and nod together about their strange journey, and
 tell no one else about it. I last saw you at the Hornburg, and
 then I thought you were going to Dunharrow,(17) but up you
 come on ships out of the South. How did you do it?'
   'Yes, do tell us,' said Pippin. 'I tried Aragorn, but he was too
 full of troubles, and just smiled.'
   'It would be a long story fully told,' said Legolas, 'and there
 are memories of that road that I do not wish to recall. Never
 again will I venture on the Paths of the Dead, not for any
 friendship; and but for my promise to Gimli I would vow never
 go into the White Mountains again.'
   'Well, for my part,' said Gimli, '[wonder was stronger than
 fear >) the fear is past, and only wonder remains; yet it cannot
 be denied that it is a dreadful road.'(18)
   'What are the Paths of the Dead?' said Pippin. 'I have never
 heard them named before.'

 'It is a path through the Mountains,' began Gimli.                
 'Yes, I saw the door from a distance,' Merry broke in. 'It is up
 in Dunharrow, in the mountains behind Theoden's town and          
 hall at Edoras. There is a long row of old stones leading across a
 high mountain field to a forbidding black mass, the Dwimor-       
 berg they call it, and there is a cave and a great opening at the
 foot of it, which nobody dares to enter. I think the Rohirrim     
 believe that inside there dwell Dead Men, or their shadows, out
 of a past long before they came to that land.'                    
 'So they told us,' said Legolas, 'and they forbade us to go in;
 but Aragorn could not be turned from it. He was in a grim         
 mood. And that fair lady that lies now in the Houses below,       
 Eowyn, wept at his going. Indeed at the last in the sight of all
 she set her arms about him imploring him not to take that road,
 and when he stood there unmoved, stern as stone, she humbled      
 herself to kneel in the dust. It was a grievous sight.'           
 'But do not think that he was not moved,' said Gimli. 'Indeed,
 I think Aragorn himself was so deeply grieved that he went       
 through all perils after like a man that can feel little more. He
 raised her up and kissed her hand, and then without a word we     
 set out,(19) before the sun came over the black ridges of the        
 mountain. I do not know how to put it into words, but even as     
 we passed the last great standing stone a dread fell on me, of
 what I could not say, and my blood seemed running cold. 1 lifted
 my feet like lead across the threshold of that darkling door; and
 hardly had we passed within when a blindness of very night        
 came upon us.                                                     
 'Madness it would seem to try and take horses on such a           
 road, but Aragorn said that we must attempt it, for every hour
 lost was perilous. We had to dismount and lead them, but I do     
 not think they would have gone far, if it had not been for        
 Legolas. He sang a song that went softly in the darkness, and     
 though they sweated and trembled they did not refuse the road.
 I am speaking of our horses that the Rohirrim gave us;(20) the       
 horses of the Rangers, it seemed, were so faithful to them that
 nothing would stay them if their masters were beside them.        
 'We had brought a few torches, and Elladan [> Aragorn]            
 went ahead bearing one, and Elrohir [> Elladan] with another      
 went at the rear. Bats flew over us, and [> We saw nothing, but]
 if we halted there seemed an endless whisper of voices all about,
 that sometimes rose into words, though not of any tongue that I
 have ever heard. Nothing assailed us, and yet steadily fear grew

                      
                                                                         
 on  us,  as  we  went  on.  Most  of  all  because we  knew, how  I know
 not  but  we  knew,  that we  could not  turn back:  that all  the black
 road  behind  us   was  packed   with  things   that  followed   us  but
 could not be seen.                                                       
  'So  it  went  on  for  some  hours,  and  then  we  came  to  a  sight
 that  I  cannot  forget.  The  road,  for  so  it  was:  no  mere cavern-
 track,  had  been  wide,  so  far  as  we  could  judge,  and  though  it
 was  utterly  dark  the  air  was  clean.  But  now  we   came  suddenly
 into  a  great  empty  space  through   which  the   way  ran   on.  The
 dread  was  so  great  on  me  that  I  could hardly  walk. Away  to the
 left  something  glittered  in  the  gloom   as  Aragorn's   torch  went
 by. ...                                                                 
                                                                         
  It  will be  seen that  when my  father transformed  this story  told by
 Gimli of the Paths of the Dead  and placed  it much  earlier in  the book
 (while in 'The Last Debate' merely referring to it as having been told to
 Merry  and  Pippin  by  Legolas:  'Swiftly  then he  told of  the haunted
 road  under the  mountains,' RK  p. 150),  he retained  Gimli as  the one
 through whose experience the passage of the tunnels is described.        
  Gimli  described  the  mailclad  skeleton  clutching  at  the   door  in
 almost  the  same  words  as  are  found  in  'The  Passing  of  the Grey
 Company' (RK pp. 60 -  1), with  the addition  that on  the helm  and the
 hilts of the sword there were 'north-runes'. But Aragorn here named
 the dead warrior:                                                        
                                                                         
   '"Here lies Baldor son of Brego," he said, "first heir of that
 Golden Hall to which he never returned. He should be lying
 now under the flowers of Evermind (21) in the Third Mound of the
 Mark; but now there are nine mounds and seven green with
 grass, and through all the long years he has lain here at the door
 he could not open. But whither that door led, and why he
 wished to pass, none now shall ever know."
                                             
  At  this  stage  in  the  evolution  of  the  book  Theoden had  told at
 Dunharrow  how  Baldor son  of Brego  passed the  Dark Door  and never
 returned (p. 315; cf. 'The Muster of Rohan' in RK, p.  70). But  with the
 removal of the story of the paths of the Dead  from the  present chapter
 to 'The Passing of the Grey Company', the discovery  of the  skeleton of
 Baldor  came  to  stand  before  Theoden's words  about him  at Dunhar-
 row;  and this  I suppose  was why  my father  changed the  passage. It
 was  certainly  not  because he  concluded that  Aragorn did  not know
 who he was. In the passage in RK it is clear that  he did  know, though
 he did not name him; for  he knew  that he  had lain  there in  the dark
 'through all the long years' as  the burial  mounds of  the Kings  of the
 Mark were raised one by one.                                            

                                  
                                                                            
    There  are  now  nine  mounds  and  seven  at  Edoras.(22) In  the original
 draft  of  this passage  the text  is interrupted  at Aragorn's  words 'Here
 lies Bealdor son of Brego' by a very roughly  written list  of the  Kings of
 the Mark, set down in two columns, thus:                                    
                                                                            
    1. Eorl.                        10. [Bealdor > Folca >] Frealaf Eowyn's.
    2. Brego.                          son (sister-son of king).            
      (Bealdor).                    11. [Brego >] Hama.                   
    3. Aldor.                       12. Walda.                            
    4. Frea.                        13. Folca.                             
    5. Freawine.                    14. Folcwine.                          
    6. Goldwine.                    15. Fengel.                            
    7. Deor.                        16. Thengel.                          
    8. Gram.                        17. Theoden.                          
    9. Helm.                                                                   
                                                                            
 The names Folca and Folcwine replaced rejected forms that I cannot          
 make out. It will be seen that these are the names found in Appendix A      
 (11, The House of Eorl) to The Lord of the Rings, with the sole             
 exception of the eleventh king Hama (in LR the eleventh king was            
 Brytta: this name has already appeared in early texts as the father of      
 Brego, VII. 435, 445, but is here absent). Beneath is written a long        
 series of Old English names, many of them those that appear in the list     
 of kings above, together with others, such as Beorn, Brytta, Haeleth,        
 Leod, Oretta, Sigeric, Sincwine, &c. I suppose that it is possible that
 this series of names was written first, though it stands second, and that
 the names of the kings in the numbered list were selected from it. At       
 any rate, it looks very much as if it were at this very point that the First
 Line and the Second Line of the Kings of the Mark, and their names,,        
 came into being.(23)                                                        
    Beside the names of the kings are written dates. My impression (not      
 having studied the actual original page) is that only the dates of          
 Fengel, Thengel, and Theoden belong with the writing of the manu-           
 script page and the list of kings, but that these certainly do so. The      
 dates are:                                                                  
                                                                            
    Fengel born 1268, died 1353.                                             
    Thengel born 1298, died 1373.                                            
    Theoden born 1328, died 141[? 8].                                        
                                                                            
 The last figure in  the date  of Theoden's  death is  unfortunately obscure,
 but  is  certainly not  9. The  dates of  these kings  in LR  are 2870-2953,
 2905-2980,  and  2948  -  3019,   which  in   the  Shire   Reckoning  become
 1270-1353,  1305-1380,  and  1348-1419.  It  is  clear  then  that  at  this
 stage  in  the  writing  of  The  Lord of  the Rings  my father  was working
 with a chronology that is esentially  similar to  that of  LR in  respect of
 Rohan  -  but  the  actual  numerical  years  are  given  according  to  the
 Shire Reckoning.(24)                                                        

   Gimli does not record any words of Aragorn's to the Dead that            
 followed:                                                                  
                                                                           
   'And   so   we   turned   away   and   left   the  dead   untouched,  and
 passed  out  of  the  hall  that  was  his  tomb,   and  hurried   on,  for
 behind  us  now   fear  seemed   treading  ever   closer.  And   just  when
 we  felt  that  we  could  endure  no  more,  and   must  either   find  an
 ending  and  escape,  or  else  turn  and  run  back  in  madness  to  meet
 the following fear, our last torch sputtered out.                          
   'Of  the  next  hour   or  hours   I  remember   little,  save   a  blind
 groping   dread  that   pressed  behind   us,  and   a  rumour   that  came
 behind  like  the  shadow  of  the noise  of endless  feet, as  horrible as
 the  ghosts  of  men  themselves.  And   we  stumbled   on  till   some  of
 us were crawling on the ground like beasts.                                
   'Then suddenly I heard the trickle of water ...                          
                                                                           
   Allowing  of  course  for  the  difference  in  mode  of  narration (e.g.
 'Then  Legolas   turning  to   speak  to   me  looked   back,  and   I  can
 remember  still the  glitter in  his bright  eyes before  my face',  cf. RK
 p.  61),  the  story  of  the  emergence  of the  Company from  the caverns
 and  descent  down  the  Vale  of  Morthond   was  little   changed  after-
 wards. Legolas takes up the narration at:                                  
                                                                           
   'The Dead were following,' said Legolas. 'A great grey host I            
 saw come flowing behind us like a shadowy  tide: shapes  of men            
 there were, and horses, and grey banners like shreds  of cloud,            
 and spears like winter thickets on a misry night. "The Dead are            
 following," I said. "Yes, the Dead ride behind,"  said Elladan.            
 "Ride on!"'                                                               
                                                                           
   It  seems  that  Gimli  then  takes  up the  tale again  with 'And  so we
 came at last out  of the  ravine as  suddenly as  if we  had issued  from a
 crack in a wall', for he refers to himself  as 'Gimli  of the  Mountain' in
 his  description  of  the  ride  to  Erech.  Elladan's  answer  to  Gimli's
 question  in RK  'Where in  Middle-earth are  we?' does  not appear;  it is
 here  Gimli  who  describes  the  course  of  Morthond  (with   the  expla-
 nation 'so I was after told'). He says that the river 'flows at last to sea
 past  Barad  Amroth (25) where  dwells  Prince  Imrahil  .,  and  he  does  not
 refer, as does Elladan in RK, to  the significance  of the  name Blackroot.
 The ride to Erech is described thus:                                       
                                                                           
   'Bells  I  heard  ringing  in  fear far  below, and  all the  people fled
 before  our  faces;  but  we  being  in  haste  rode  swiftly as  though in
 pursuit,  until  our  horses  were  stumbling   weary,  and   [struck  out:
 I at  least,]  even  Gimli  of  the  Mountain,  was  spent.  And  thus  just
 ere  the  midnight  hour  -   and  black   it  was   wellnigh  as   in  the

 caverns,  for  though  we  did  not  know  it  yet  the  darkness  of
 Mordor  was  creeping  over us  - just  ere midnight  we came  to the
 Hill of Erech.'                                                       
                                                                      
   On  the  Darkness  out  of  Mordor  coming  over  the  sky   as  the
 Company rode to Erech see the Note on  Chronology at  the end  of this
 chapter.  -  The text  at this  point becomes  the primary  draft, and
 continues:                                                            
                                                                      
   'And what is that?' asked Merry.                                    
   'You  should  ask  Aragorn,'  said  Gimli,  'or the  brethren: they
 know, as is fitting, all  the lore  of Gondor  of old.  It is  a black
 stone,  they  say,  that  old  tales  tell  was brought (26) in  ages past
 from  Numenor  before  its  fall,  when  its ships  would come  to the
 west shores  of the  world. And  it was  set upon  a hill.  And there-
 on  the  King  of  the  [struck out:  Dark] Men  of the  Mountains had
 sworn  [>  once  swore]  allegiance  to the  West; but  afterwards the
 [?Shadow]  Men  fell  again  under  the  dominion  of  Sauron. Isildur
 came  to  the  Stone  of Erech,  when he  gathered strength  to resist
 the   power   of   Mordor,   and   he   summoned   the   Men   of  the
 Mountains to come to his aid, and they would not.                     
   'Then Isildur said to their  king of  that day:  "Thou shalt  be the
 last.  Yet  if the  West prove  mightier than  thy black  Master, this
 curse I set on thee  and thy  folk: to  rest never  till your  oath is
 fulfilled.  For  this war  shall last  down many  ages, and  you shall
 be  summoned  once  again  ere  the  end."  And  they fled  before the
 wrath of Isildur, and  did not  dare to  go forth  to war  on Sauron's
 part.  And  they  hid  themselves  in secret  places in  the mountains
 and  seldom  came  forth  again,  but  slowly  died  and  dwindled  in
 the barren hills.                                                     
                                                                      
   This account of Gimli's to Merry and Pippin at  Minas Tirith  is the
 forerunner  of  Aragorn's  to Legolas  and Gimli  at the  Hornburg (RK
 p. 55). I think that it may very well have been at this point that the
 story of the breaking of their oath to Isildur by the Men of the Moun-
 tains first emerged, and that it was now that  Aragorn's words  at the
 Hornburg were enlarged to include it.                                 
   Gimli continues:                                                    
                                                                      
   'But  afterwards,  in  the  days  of Gondor's  later power,  men set
 a  ring-wall about  the Stone  of Erech,  and built  beside it  on the
 hilltop  a  tall  dark  tower,  and  there  was  guarded  the  seventh
 Palantir,  which  now  is  lost.(27) The  tower  is  ruinous   and  the
 ring-wall  is  broken,  and  all  about  the land  is empty,  for none
 will dwell near the Hill of Erech, because  it is  said that  at times

                        
                                                                        
 the   Shadow-men  will   gather  there,   thronging  about   the  ruined
 wall,   and   whispering.   And   though  their   tongue  is   now  long
 forgotten,  it  is  said  that  they cry  "We are  come!" and  they wish
 to  fulfill  the  broken  oath and  be at  rest. But  the terror  of the
 Dead lies on that hill and all the land about.                          
  'Thither  in  the  blackness  before   the  storm   we  came.   And  at
 last  we  halted.  And  Elladan  blew  his  silver  horn,   and  Elrohir
 unfurled  the  banner  that  at  the  Hornburg  he  bore  still  wrapped
 in  grey  [later >  black];(28) and  dark as  it was  the stars  glinted on
 it,  as  it  was  spread  on  a  wind  like  a  breath of  ghosts coming
 down  from  the  mountains.  Nothing   could  we   see  but   the  seven
 stars  of  Elendil,  and  yet  we were  aware of  a great  host gathered
 all  about  us  upon  the  hill, and  of the  sound of  answering horns,
 as if their echo came up out of deep caverns far away.                  
  'But  Aragorn  stood  by  the  banner  and   cried  aloud.   "The  hour
 is come at last,  and the  oath shall  be fulfilled.  I go  to Pelargir,
 and  ye  shall  come  behind  me.  And  when  all  this  land  is clean,
 return,  and  be  at  peace!  For  I  am  Elessar,  Isildur's   heir  of
 Gondor."                                                                
  'Then  there  was  a  silence,  and  no  whisper   or  rustle   did  we
 hear  as  the  night  wore  away.  We lay  within the  ruined ring-wall,
 and  some  slept;  though  we  felt   the  terror   of  the   Dead  that
 hedged us round.                                                        
                                                                        
  At this point a revised  version begins,  and I  follow this,  since it
 adheres very closely to the initial draft (see however notes 33, 34, and
 35).                                                                    
                                                                        
 'Then  followed   the  weariest   journey  that   I  have   ever  known,
 wearier  than  our  hunting  of  orcs  over  wide  Rohan  on  our  feet;
 three  days  and  nights  and  on  into  another  day with  little pause
 or rest.(29) No   other   mortal   men   could   have  endured   it  and
 fought  at  the  end of  it, save  only the  Dunedain, these  Rangers of
 the  North.  They  are  as  tough  as  dwarves,   1  swear   it,  though
 none  of  my  kin  should  believe  me.  Almost  I wished  I was  an elf
 and  had  no  need  of  sleep,  or could  both sleep  and wake  at once,
 as it seems that Legolas can.                                           
   'I  was  never in  that land  before, and  I could  not tell  you much
 of  our  road,  even  if  you  wished to  hear. But  it is,  I reckoned,
 some  60  leagues  as  birds   fly  from   Erech,  over Tarlang's Neck (30)
 into  Lamedon,  and  so,   crossing  Kiril   and  Ringlo,   to  Linhir
 beside  the  waters  of  Gilrain, where  there are  fords that  lead into

 Lebennin. And from Linhir it is a hundred miles, if it is a step, to
 Pelargir on Anduin.(31)                                             
   'The next morning day did not dawn, as you will remember          
 well, but it must have been before the sun rose above the           
 vapours of Mordor that we set out again,(32) and east we rode to        
 meet the gathering gloom; and ever close behind us came the         
 Shadow Host, some riding, some striding, but all moving             
 silently and with the same great speed, and when they overtook      
 our horses, though we pressed them to their utmost, the Shadow      
 Host swept about us wide on either flank, and some went on          
 ahead.                                                              
   'Terror and wonder ran on wings before us, and all that was       
 left of the folk of Lamedon hid, or fled to the woods and hills.(33)
 Thus we came at nightfall of the second day from Erech to           
 Linhir. There the men of Lamedon had been contesting the            
 passage of Gilrain with a great strength of the Haradrim, and of
 their allies the Shipmen of Umbar, who had sailed up Gilrain-       
 mouth and far up the waters of Anduin with a host of ships and      
 were now ravaging Lebennin and the coast of Belfalas. But           
 defenders and invaders alike fled at our approach. And thus we      
 crossed into Lebennin unopposed, and there we rested, and           
 sorely we needed it.                                                
   'Next day we made our greatest endeavour, for Aragorn was         
 pressed with a great fear lest all that he did would prove too      
 late. "I counted on two days more at the least," he said; "but      
 those who challenge Sauron will ever fall short of their reckon-
 ing. Now already Minas Tirith is beset, and I fear it will fall ere
 we can come to its aid."                                            
   'So we rose ere night had passed, and went as swift as our        
 stouthearted horses could endure over the flat plains of Leben-     
 nin; and behind us and about us the host of the Dead flowed like
 a grey tide.                                                        
   'Great rumour of dismay went on before us. I do not know        
 who set the tales on the wing, but as we learned after among        
 both friends and foes the tidings ran wild: "Isildur has come       
 back from the dead. The dead are come to war, but they wield        
 living swords. [The Lord of the Ring has arisen!]"(34) And all the
 enemy who heard these things fled as best they could back to        
 Anduin, for they had many ships there and great strength; and       
 we hunted them out of the land: all that day and through the        
 next night, with few brief halts, we rode. And so we came at the
 bitter last to the Great River again, and we knew ere we came       

              
                                                                     
 that  it  was near,  for there  was salt  in the  air. The  mouths of
 Anduin  were  indeed  still  far  away  south  and  west  of  us, but
 Anduin is even at Pelargir  so great  and wide  that almost  it seems
 a slow-flowing sea, and countless birds are on its shores.           
  'It  was  day,  I  guessed, by  the veiled/hidden  sun -  the fourth
 since  we  left  Dunharrow  -  when  we  reached  those  shores,  and
 saw the  fleets of  Umbar. And  then we  had to  fight, at  last. But
 fear  was  our  mightiest  weapon.  Many  of  those  who  learned  of
 our  coming  had  already  gone  aboard  and  thrust off  and escaped
 down  Anduin  to  the  the  Sea. But  the enemy,  whose main  task it
 was  to  ravage  South  Gondor  and  prevent  help  going   north  to
 the  City,  had been  too wide-scattered  for all  to escape  so. And
 while  they  marched  abroad  their  ships   were  left   with  small
 guard.  But  there  were   among  them   captains  sent   by  Mordor,
 and  orc-chieftains,  and  they  were  not  so  easily  dismayed, and
 they  endeavoured  to  hold  their  men  to  a  defence.  And  indeed
 the  Haradrim  are  a  grim  folk,  and not  easily daunted  by shade
 or blade.  But their  resistance did  not last  long. For  now seeing
 that  we  were  indeed   come  to   aid  them,   many  of   the  more
 stouthearted  men  of  the  land  gathered  to  Aragorn.  And  on the
 ships the slaves rebelled.  For the  Corsairs of  Umbar had  in their
 ships  many  new-captured  prisoners,  and   the  oarsmen   were  all
 slaves,   many   taken  in   Gondor  in   petty  raids,   or  unhappy
 descendants of  slaves made  in years  gone by.  Before the fifth day
 was  over  we  had taken  well nigh  all the  fleet, save  some ships
 that  their  masters  set  ablaze; and  all the  enemy that  were not
 slain  or  drowned  were  gone  flying over  the [?borders]  into the
 desert that lies north of Harad.(35)                                 
                                                                     
  Here the revised version stops, at the foot of a page, and my father
 struck out the whole page (which begins at 'So we  rose ere  night had
 passed', p. 412) and wrote a pencilled note:                         
                                                                     
  No  fight,  but  Shadows  [?flow  into]  the ships  and all  men leap
  overboard  except  the  chained  captives. But  Rangers went  to each
  ship and comforted the captives.                                    
                                                                     
 He then rewrote the page - and this was obviously done  immediately -
 beginning at the same words.                                         
                                                                     
  'So  we  rose  ere  night  had  passed,  and  went  as swift  as our
 stouthearted   horses   could   endure  over   the  green   plains  of
 Lebennin  darkling  under  the  shade  of  Mordor;  and  all  about us
 the Host of the  Dead flowed  on like  a grey  tide. Still  the rumour

 of  our  coming  went  before  us  and  all   men  were   dismayed,  and
 none  neither  foe  nor  friend  would  wait   for  our   approach.  For
 the  darkness  weighed  on  the  allies  of  Mordor,  not being  orcs or
 folk  bred  in  the  Black  Land,  and  those  that  could fled  back to
 Anduin,   where   they  had   gathered  many   ships.  Thus   we  hunted
 them  from  Gondor  all  that  day  and  on  through  the   next  night,
 halting  seldom  and  sleeping  not  at  all,  until  we  came   at  the
 bitter end to the Great River.'                                         
   'I knew it,'  said Legolas,  'long ere  we reached  it, for  there was
 salt  in  the  air.  And  my  heart was  troubled for  I thought  that I
 drew  near  the  Sea,  but  indeed  the  Mouths   of  Anduin   were  far
 away to the south.... '                                                 
                                                                        
   This is only the  second time  that Legolas  has spoken  since Gimli's
 story  of  the  journey began.  He speaks  now of  the great  breadth of
 Anduin  as Gimli  had done  (p. 413);(36) and (following  the note  at the
 end of the previous version of this section of the story) he goes on:
                                                                        
 '... But fear was the only weapon that we needed, for the grey          
 host passed on to every ship whether drawn  up or  anchored in          
 the tide, and all the men that  were in  them fled,  or leaped          
 overboard, save the slaves of the oars  that were  chained, or          
 captives under hold.'                                                   
                                                                        
   Legolas  describes  how  to  each  of  the  greater  ships one  of the
 Rangers went to comfort the captives,  bidding them  put aside  fear and
 be free (RK p. 152).                                                    
                                                                        
   'And  when  all  the  fleet  was  in  our  hands  Aragorn  went  up on
 that   ship   which   he   took  for   his  own   and  let   sound  many
 trumpets,   and   the   Shadow   Host  withdrew   to  the   shores,  and
 stood  in  great  array there  silently, and  there was  a red  light in
 the  gloom,  for  some  of  the  enemy  had fired  their ships  ere they
 abandoned them.'                                                        
                                                                        
   Aragorn's  words  to  the  Dead  ('Now  I  will  hold  your  oath  all
 fulfilled') are close to those in RK (p. 153).(37) It is 'a tall figure of
 shadow', not as in RK said to be the King of the Dead, that  steps forth
 and breaks his spear.  The remainder  of the  story is  very much  as in
 RK, though here  told by  Legolas: the  rest of  the Company  that night
 'while others laboured', the release of the captives from the ships, the
 coming  of  the  men  of  Lebennin  (but  Angbor   of  Lamedon   is  not
 named),  the  slow  passage  by  oar up  Anduin (but  it was  'the fifth
 morning, that is the day before yesterday' that the  fleet set  out from
 Pelargir:  see  the  Note  on Chronology  at the  end of  this chapter),
 Aragorn's fear that they would be too late ('for it is forty leagues and

  two by river from  Pelargir to  the landings  under the  Pelennor wall'),
  and  the  red  glow  to  the  north  from  the  burning of  Minas Tirith.
  Legolas' discourse ends,  as does  Gimli's in  RK, with  'It was  a great
  hour,  and  a  great  day,  whatever  may  come  after',  to  which Gimli
  replies: 'Yes, whatever come after. Yet for all our victory the  faces of
  Gandalf  and  Aragorn  look  grave.  I  wonder  what  counsel   they  are
  taking in the tents below. For my part I wish it were all well over. Yet,
  whatever is still to do, I hope I may have part in it, for the  honour of
  the folk of the Lonely Mountain.' To this was added later:  ' "And  I for
  the folk of the Wood," said Legolas.' Then follows:                      
                                                                          
    His [> Their] wish was granted. Two days  later the  army of           
  the West  that was  to march  forth was  all assembled  on the           
  Pelennor. The host of orcs and easterlings had turned back out           
  of Anorien and harried and scattered by the Rohirrim  had fled           
  with little fight towards Cair Andros ...                                
                                                                          
    This is  the beginning  of 'The  Black Gate  Opens' in  RK, but  with a
  major difference from the subsequent story:  for here  Pippin as  well as
  Merry was left behind.                                                   
                                                                          
  ... To their bitter grief the hobbits were not in that riding.           
    'Merry  is not  fit for  such a  journey yet,'  said Aragorn,  'even if
  he  could  ride  a  swift  steed.  And  you  Peregrin  will  lighten  his
  grief  if  you  stay  with  him.  So  far  you  have  kept even  with one
  another  as  well  as  your  fortunes  allowed  - and  indeed if  you did
  no  more  to  the  end  of  your  days  you   have  earned   honour,  and
  justified  the  wisdom  of  Elrond.(38) And  indeed  we  are  all   in  like
  peril.  For  though  it  may  be  our part  to find  a bitter  end before
  the  gate  of  Mordor,  if  we  do  so,  then you  will have  your chance
  or  necessity also  of a  last stand  either here  or wherever  the black
  tide overtakes you. Farewell! '                                          
    And   so   despondently   Merry   and    Pippin   stood    before   the
  ruined   gates  of   Minas  Tirith   with  young   Bergil  and   saw  the
  great  army  mustered.  Bergil  was  downcast   and  grieved   at  heart,
  for  his  father  was  commanded  to   march  and   lead  a   company  of
  the  men  of  Imrahil.  For  he   having  broken   his  oaths   could  no
  longer  remain  in  the  guard  of  the  Citadel,  until  his   case  was
  judged.(39)                                                              
    The  trumpets  rang   and  the   host  began   to  move.   [First  rode
  Aragorn   and  Gandalf   and  the   sons  of   Elrond  with   the  banner
  and   the   knights   of   Dol   Amroth.   Then   came  Eomer   with  the
  [?chosen]   Riders,   and  afterwards   came  those   of  his   men  that
  were  on  foot,  and  men  of   Lebennin,  and   last  the   great  com-

 panies  of  Minas  Tirith  led  by  Imrahil.](40) And   long  after   it  had
 passed  away  out  of  sight  down   the  great   road  to   the  Causeway
 the  three  stood  there,  until  the  last  glint of  the morning  sun on
 spear and helm twinkled and was lost.                                     
                                                                          
   At this point my  father decided  that Pippin  did in  fact go  with the
 host to the Black Gate,  and he  began anew  at the  words 'His  [> Their]
 wish  was  granted'  following  the  end  of  'The   Tale  of   Gimli  and
 Legolas',  continuing  as  before  with 'Two  days later  the army  of the
 West  that was  to march  forth was  all assembled  on the  Pelennor.' The
 text then continued both in initial draft and in a fair copy to the end of
 the  story  afterwards  called  'The  Black  Gate Opens',  with continuous
 pagination all  the way  through from  the meeting  of Gimli  and Legolas
 with Imrahil before they went to the Houses of Healing.  It is  thus clear
 that the whole  of the  last part  of Book  V was  in a  completed (though
 not  final)  and  coherent  form before  any structural  reorganisation of
 the narrative took place. The structure was:                              
                                                                          
      Gimli and Legolas meet Imrahil and go to the Houses of Healing.      
   The Last Debate.                                                        
   The Tale of Gimli and Legolas in the garden of the Houses of            
   Healing.                                                                
   The journey to the Morannon and the Parley.                             
                                                                          
   The next  stage was  the decision  to reorganise  the narrative  so that
 'Gimli's  Tale'  should stand  independently -  and therefore  precede the
 Debate.  To  this  end  my father  wrote a  tentative conclusion  for 'The
 Tale of Gimli and Legolas':                                               
                                                                          
   And so ended  the tale  of Legolas  and Gimli  concerning the           
 ride  of  Aragorn  by  the Paths  of the  Dead, which  long was           
 recalled and sung in Gondor in after days, and it was said that           
 never  again  were  the  Shadow-men  seen  by  mortal   men  on           
 mountain or in vale, [and the road from  Dunharrow was  free to           
 all who were willing to take that way. Yet few did so,  for the           
 memory of fear abode there still; and none  ever dared  to open           
 Baldor's door.  Struck out  immediately: A  tomb they  made for           
 him in that dark place and so built it that none could  come at           
 that door.]                                                               
                                                                          
   The  passage  that  I  have  bracketed was  replaced, probably  at once,
 by the following:                                                         
                                                                          
 but  the  stone  of  Erech  stood  ever alone,  and on  that hill  no bird
 would  alight  nor  beast  feed;  and  the  memory  of  fear  still  abode
 in  the  dark  ways  from  Dunharrow,  and  few   were  willing   to  take
 that road; and none ever dared to open Baldor's door.                     

    Concomitantly   with   this   the   words   'Their  wish   was  granted'
  (following  the  end  of  'The Tale  of Gimli  and Legolas'  and beginning
  the  story  of  the  march  from  Minas  Tirith)  were  circled,   with  a
  direction to omit them if this 'end-piece' to the 'Tale' were added to it;
  and  a note  was scribbled  on the  manuscript beside  the opening  of the
  debate (p. 403): 'It might be better to take out  the debate  (shorten it)
  and put it  at the  beginning of  the Parley  chapter.' Thus  the decision
  was taken to divide the chapter as it stood (entitled  'The Parley  at the
  Black  Gate',  p. 399)  into two:  the first  to be  called 'The  Paths of
  the  Dead' and  consisting solely  of the  tale told  to Merry  and Pippin
  in the garden of the Houses of Healing,  the second  to be  called 'Parley
  at the Gate' and beginning with the debate in Aragorn's tent.             
    Relatively  little  adjustment of  the existing  material was  needed to
  achieve this.  From the  point in  the narrative  where Gimli  and Legolas
  found  Merry  and  Pippin  ('and  the  meeting  of  those  friends  was  a
  merry one') my father  simply dropped  the transition  to the  debate (see
  p.  403)  and  continued  with  the  conversation  in  the  garden  of the
  Houses  of  Healing  (see  p.  405  and  RK  p.  149):  'For a  while they
  walked and talked, rejoicing for  a brief  space in  peace and  rest under
  the  fair  morning  high  up  in  the  windy  circles  of  the  City.' The
  conversation   leading   into   the  'Tale'   was  somewhat   changed.  In
  contrast to the earlier version Merry  is no  longer represented  as being
  ignorant  (as  he  could  not have  been) of  Aragorn's passage  under the
  mountains  (see  p.  405  and  note  17).  After  Pippin's   words  'Come,
  Legolas!  You  and  Gimli  have  mentioned   your  strange   journey  with
  Trotter  about  a  dozen  times  already  this  morning.  But  you haven't
  mentioned anything about it' this dialogue follows:                       
                                                                           
    'I  know  some  of  the  story  and  I  guess  some  more,'  said Merry.
  'For  I  hear  that  you  came  in  ships  from  the  South.  So   I  know
  that   somehow   you   must   have   got   through,   though   in  Dunhar-
  row  all  the  people  were  afraid,   and  Eowyn   I  thought   had  been
  weeping.  Come  now!  The  sun  is  shining  and  we  can  bear  it.  Tell
  us about the Paths of the Dead!'                                          
    'The  sun  may  shine,'  said  Gimli,  'still  there  are   memories  of
  that  road  that  I  do  not  wish  to  recall.  Had  I  known   what  was
  before  me  I  think  that  not  for  any  friendship  would I  have taken
  those paths.'                                                             
    'For  my  part,'  said  Legolas, 'I  do not  fear the  Dead; but  I hate
  the  darkness  under  earth  far  from  hope   of  the   sky.  It   was  a
  dreadful journey!'                                                         
    'The  Dead?'  said  Pippin.  'The  Paths  of  the  Dead?  I  have  never
  heard of them before. Won't you tell us some more?'                       
    'It  is  the  name  of  a  road  that   goes  through   the  mountains,'

 said  Merry.  'I  saw  the Gate,  as they  call it,  from a  distance when
 I was in Dunharrow ...'                                                    
                                                                           
   Merry  then  continues  as  he  does  in  the  earlier  version,  and  is
 followed  by  Legolas  and  Gimli  describing  the  departure  and Eowyn's
 distress (cf. p. 406 and note 19):                                         
                                                                           
 '... I think the men of the Mark believe that inside there dwell           
 the shadows of Dead Men,  out of  a past  long before  they came           
 to that land.'                                                             
   'So they told us,' said Legolas. 'And that  lady who  lies now           
 below in the Houses,  Eowyn, she  begged Aragorn  not to  go in;           
 but he could not be turned from it. He  was in  haste, and  in a           
 stern mood.'                                                               
   'And at the last when she saw that he  would go,'  said Gimli,           
 'then she begged to come with us! Indeed  she knelt  before him.           
 Yet  she is  a proud  lady. I  wondered much  what it  all might           
 mean, and I was grieved; for  she was  young and  much troubled.           
 But  he  raised  her  up and  kissed her  hand and  without more           
 words we departed. Yet I saw that he, too, was greatly grieved.'           
                                                                           
   The earlier version was for the rest of its length very largely repeated:
 that is  to say,  the original  pages were  retained with  their pagination
 altered  and  some  passages  rewritten.  Legolas now  plays a  larger part
 in the  narration, describing  the ride  to Erech  (see pp.  409 -  10), at
 which point Gimli  re-enters: '"Yes,  indeed, and  never shall  I forget!"
 said Gimli, taking up the tale again. "For the  terror of  the Dead  lay on
 the hill and  all the  land about  it"'; he  continues much  as in  RK pp.
 62 - 3, but he does not say that Isildur set up the Stone  of Erech  at his
 landing ('It looked as if it had fallen from  the sky,  but it  was brought
 out of the West, we were told'), and he  still repeats  the story  (p. 411)
 that  when  the  Shadow-men  gathered  about  the  Stone  'sometimes  a cry
 would  be  heard  in  our  speech:(41) "We  have   come!"'  The   tower  and
 ring-wall on the Hill  of Erech,  and the  palantir, have  now disappeared.
                                                                           
   For  the  second  of  the  new chapters  my father  wrote a  new opening,
 beginning  (cf.  p.  403)  'In  the  meanwhile Imrahil  sent for  Eomer and
 went  down  with  him,  and  they  came  to  the  tents  of  Aragorn...' To
 this  he  added  the  existing  pages  of  the  manuscript  recounting  the
 course  of  the  debate, which  ended at  'And he  drew forth  Branding and
 held it up glittering in the sun' (p. 405), and then the manuscript  of the
 story  of  the  journey  to  the  Morannon  and  the  Parley.  On  the  new
 opening  he  pencilled  the  title  'Parley  at the  Gate' and  the chapter
 number 'LI', so that 'The Paths of  the Dead'  was 'L'  (see note  10). The
 structure was now (see p. 416):                                            

 The  Paths  of  the  Dead  Gimli  and  Legolas  go  to  the   Houses  of
 Healing,  and  Merry  and Pippin  hear the  tale of  the journey  of the
 Grey   Company   from   Dunharrow   to  the   Battle  of   the  Pelennor
 Fields.                                                                 
 Parley  at  the  Gate  'The  Last Debate',  ending with  Aragorn's draw-
 ing  the  sword  of  Elendil;  the  journey  to  the  Morannon,  and the
 parley with the Lieutenant of Barad-dur.                                
                                                                        
 It  was  probably  now  that  my  father  made a  typescript of  the two
 chapters, the text diverging very little from the manuscript material as
 now  reorganised;(42) but  he treated  them as  subdivisions of  a single
 chapter, without an overall title, and with  the puzzling  number 'XLIX'
 (see note 10): (i) 'The Paths of the Dead' and (ii) 'Parley at the Black
 Gate'.                                                                  
                                                                        
 The  subsequent  history  of  the   chapter  is   textually  exceedingly
 complicated, but I shall treat it briefly. The first typescript was very
 heavily revised, and two large sections of it were written out anew in a
 separate manuscript. The effect of all this was  to bring  the narrative
 closer in very many points to the texts in  RK, and  indeed much  of the
 earlier part  now required  little more  than grammatical  alteration to
 bring Gimli's story to the direct author's narrative in 'The  Passing of
 the Grey Company.'(43)                                                  
   In  the  ride  from  Erech   over  Tarlang's   Neck  into   Lamedon  the
 deserted town of Calembel upon Ciril (so spelt,  with C)  appears,(44) and
 the  blood-red  sunset  behind  Pinnath  Gelin  (RK  p.  63):  the final
 chronology had now entered (see the Note  at the  end of  this chapter).
 Angbor  of Lamedon  is now  named, but  the new  text differs  here from
 that of RK (p. 151):                                                    
                                                                        
 'Then  Aragorn   said  to   Angbor  their   captain  who   alone  stayed
 to  meet  him:  "Behold!  I  am  not  the  King  of  the  Dead,  but the
 Heir of Isildur, and I  live yet  for a  while. Follow  me, if  you wish
 to see the end of this darkness and the downfall of Mordor."            
 'And  Angbor  answered:  "I  will  gather  all  men  that  I   may,  and
 follow  after  you  swiftly."  His  was  a  stout  heart  indeed,  and I
 grieve  that  he  fell  beside  me,  as  we  clove  our  way   from  the
 Harlond.                                                                
                                                                        
 In  RK  (p.  153)  Angbor of  Lamedon came  to Pelargir  but did  not go
 up Anduin in the black fleet; he is last referred to  by Aragorn  in the
 debate in his tent (p. 157)  as marching  at the  head of  four thousand
 men  from Pelargir  through Lossarnach  and expected  soon to  arrive at
 Minas Tirith.                                                           
 To Legolas' words about the Sea (p. 414) he now adds his second         
 reference to the gulls (RK p. 151): 'Alas! for the wailing of the gulls.
 Did  not  the  Lady  tell  me  to  beware  of them.  For they  cannot be

 forgotten.' He is thinking of Galadriel's message to him, spoken by
 Gandalf in Fangorn (TT p. 106):                                        
 Legolas Greenleaf long under tree                                      
 In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea!                            
 If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore,                      
 Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.                       
 For Galadriel's original message to Legolas, and its application, see
 p. 22.                                                                 
   There is an interesting passage immediately following in  this revised
 version.  In  the  version given  on p.  413 there  was fighting  on the
 shores, for  'there were  captains sent  by Mordor,  and orc-chieftains,
 and  they  were not  so easily  dismayed, and  they endeavoured  to hold
 their men to a defence. And  indeed the  Haradrim are  a grim  folk, and
 not easily daunted by shade or  blade.' This  was rejected,  following a
 note that there was in fact no fighting at Pelargir: 'But fear  was the
 only weapon that we needed, for the grey host passed  on to  every ship
 ...  and  all  the  men  that were  in them  fled, or  leaped overboard'
 (p. 414). My father now went back on this decision.                    
                                                                       
   '1 soon forgot  them [the  gulls] for  my part,'  said Gimli.  'For at
 last  we  came  to   a  battle.   The  Haradrim   were  driven   now  to
 despair,  and  could fly  no longer.  There at  Pelargir lay  the fleets
 of  Umbar,   fifty  great   ships  and   many  smaller   vessels  beyond
 count.  Some  few  of  our  enemies  reached  their  ships and  put off,
 seeking  either  to  escape  down  the  River  or   to  reach   the  far
 shores;  and  some  they  set  fire  to.  But we  came too  swiftly upon
 them  for  many  to  slip  from us  so. We  were joined  by some  of the
 hardier  folk  of  Lebennin  and  the  Ethir,  but  we  were   not  many
 when  the  corsairs  turned  to  bay;  and  seeing  our  weakness  their
 hearts  revived  and they  assailed us  in their  turn. There  was stern
 work  there  in  the  twilight  by  the  grey  waters,  for  the  Shadow
 Host  halted  and  wavered,  unwilling  at  the last,  as it  seemed, to
 make  war  on  Sauron.  Then  Aragorn   let  blow   a  horn   and  cried
 aloud, saying that if they broke their oath a second time              
                                                                       
   Here  my  father  stopped  and  rewrote  the  passage  to  a  form not
 essentially different from that in RK,  where the  Shadow Host  is still
 said to have 'hung back at the  last', but  with no  explicit suggestion
 that they were reluctant to fulfil the  oath, and  where for  the living
 there was no need for 'stern work in the twilight by the grey waters'.
                                                                       
   At  this  time  my  father  also wrote  an experimental  version 'with
 entrance to the Door told at end of Chapter 11 of Book V' - that  is, at
 the  end  of  'Many  Roads  Lead  Eastward'.  This begins:  'But Aragorn
 and  his  company  rode across  the high  mountain-field upon  which was
 set the refuge of the  Rohirrim; and  the paths  were laid  between rows

                                  
                                                                              
 of  standing  stones  hoar  with  age  uncounted.  The  light was  still grey,
 for  the  sun  had  not  yet  climbed  over  the black  ridges of  the Haunted
 Mountain  ...'  It  must  be  presumed  that the  story of  the coming  of the
 Grey   Company   to   Dunharrow,   and    Aragorn's   parting    from   Eowyn,
 had  now  been  added   to  'Many   Roads  Lead   Eastward'  (see   note  19).
 The  text  ends  thus:  '...  a  groping  blindness  overcame him,  even Gimli
 Gloin's  son  the  Dwarf,   who  had   walked  in   many  deep   places  under
 earth.  So  the  Grey  Company   dared  the   forbidden  door,   and  vanished
 from the land of living men.'                                                 
  Although  this  shows  that  my  father  was  pondering  the  possibility  of
 removing  some  part  of  the  story  told  in  the  Houses  of   Healing  and
 rewriting it as  direct narrative  in its  chronological place,  the following
 typescript  is  a  text of  the whole  'Tale of  Gimli and  Legolas' incorpor-
 ating  all  revision  to  that  time,  and  ending  with  the words  'and none
 ever dared to move Baldor's bones' (cf. p. 416).                              
  There  followed  a  rough  manuscript  in  which  the   first  part   of  the
 'Tale' was  written out  as direct  narrative, to  stand in  its chronological
 place in  the earlier  chapter, thus  greatly shortening  the material  of the
 end  of  Book  V.  A  further  typescript  has  the  structure  of  'The  Last
 Debate'  in  RK,  with  the  story of  the passage  of the  Paths of  the Dead
 removed  and  only  mentioned  as  having  been  told,  though  here   it  was
 still Gimli who told it:                                                      
                                                                              
  'Alas!  I  had  heart  only  for  myself,'  said  Gimli,  'and  I  do not
 wish  to  recall  that  journey.'  He  fell silent;  but Pippin  and Merry
 were  so  eager  for  news  that  at  last  he  yielded  and told  them in
 halting  words  of  the  dreadful  passage  of  the  mountains   that  led
 to   the  black   Stone  of   Erech.  But   when  he   came  to   the  Day
 without  Dawn   he  ceased.   'I  am   weary  recalling   that  weariness,
 and the horror of the Dark,' he said.                                         
  'Then I will say on,' said Legolas.(45)                                       
                                                                              
  The  structure  of  the  narrative  in  RK  had been  at last  achieved, with
 the  debate  in the  tent of  Aragorn following  in the  same chapter  the end
 of  the  story  told  to  Merry and  Pippin in  the Houses  of Healing.(46) I see
 no way to determine at what stage all this later work was done.               
                                                                              
                            NOTES.                                             
                                                                              
 1.  On  Haramon see  p. 359  and note   3. The reading 'the Hills of       
     Haramon'  (plural)  in  the  outline   'The Story Foreseen from           
     Forannest' is certain, in contrast to  the 'great hill' referred to in
     the present text.                                                         
 2.  For Bealdor (Baldor) son  of Brego   see pp. 315-16, and on the         
     spelling of the name p. 321 note 11.                                      

  3.  A  pencilled  note  in  the  margin  reads:  '25  miles.   Dunharrow  >
      rech  55.'  Presumably  '25  miles'  refers to  the distance  from the
      issue  of  the  Paths  of  the  Dead  to  the  Stone  of Erech.  On the
      distance from Dunharrow to Erech see pp. 296 - 7 note 2.               
  4.  By  '(say  Linhir?)'  I  suppose that  my father  meant that  since the
      road  to  Pelargir  crossed  the  Lameduin  (later Gilrain)  at Linhir,
      'Linhir'  would  do  as  well  as 'Fords  of Lameduin'.  Linhir appears
      also in  'The Story  Foreseen from  Forannest' (p.  361); it  is marked
      on  the  Second  Map  (see  p.  437)  at some  distance above  the head
      of the  estuary of  Lameduin, the  direct distance  from here  to Erech
      on this map being 36 mm. or 180 miles.                                
  5.  From Linhir to Pelargir  direct is  2 cm.  or 100  miles on  the Second
      Map.                                                                   
  6.  The  rejected  portion  of the  outline has  here: 'The  Haradwaith try
      to  fly.  Some  take  ship   back  again   down  Anduin.   But  Aragorn
      overtakes  them  and  captures  most of  the ships.  Some are  set fire
      to,  but  several  manned  by  slaves   and  captives   are  captured.'
      (Then  follows  the  passage  about  the  Gondorian   captives.)  'Ara-
      gorn   embarks   with   men   of   South   Gondor;   the   Shadow  Host
      disperses, pursuing the Haradwaith about the vales.'                   
  7.  Cf.  'The  Battle  of  the Pelennor  Fields', p.  370: 'south  away the
      river  went  in  a  knee  about  the  out-thrust of  the hills  of Emyn
      Arnen  in  lower   Ithilien,  and   Anduin  bent   then  in   upon  the
      Pelennor  so  that  its  outwall was  there built  upon the  brink, and
      that at  the nearest  was no  more than  [five >]  four miles  from the
      Gates.'  In  'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Forannest'  (p.  363  note 3)
      the Pelennor Wall is at this point ten miles away from the City.       
  8.  On the Second Map it is 125  miles (the  figure given  in the  text) up
      river from Pelargir  to the  angle of  the 'knee'  in Anduin  (see note
      7),  and  thus  the  straight stretch  of ten  miles 'just  before that
      point', visible from Minas Tirith, is  the 'leg'  below the  'knee'. In
      the  further  continuation  of  the  passage  from  'The Battle  of the
      Pelennor  Fields'  cited  in note  7 (see  p. 370)  the length  of 'the
      reach  of  Arnen'  is  given  as  'three  leagues';  but on  the Second
      Map,  on  which  both these  passages were  based, it  is substantially
      longer.  In  RK  (p. 122)  'Anduin, from  the bend  at the  Harlond, so
      flowed  that  from  the  City  men  could look  down it  lengthwise for
      some leagues.'                                                         
  9.  Cf.  'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Forannest' (p.  359): 'Then  as final
      despair  comes  on,  and  Rohirrim  give  back,  [west  >]  south  wind
      rolls  back  cloud,  and  noon-sun  gleams  through.   Aragorn  unfurls
      his  great  standard  from  ship-top. The  crown and  stars of  Sun and
      Moon shine out.'                                                       
 10.  The  opening  page   of  the   manuscript  bears   the  chapter-numbers
      'XLI', 'L', 'L(b)', and  'XLIX', all  of which  were struck  out except
      the last. 'XLI' is an obvious slip (for 'LI'?), since the chapter could

       not possibly bear this number; but it is  hard to  see how  it could
       be 'XLIX' either (see p. 386 and note 7).                           
  11.  This  draft  for  the  debate  follows  immediately on  an abandoned
       sentence of 'The Houses of Healing', thus:                          
            Gandalf  and  Pippin  then  came  to  Merry's  room  and  there
       saw Aragorn stand                                                   
            'My lords,' said Gandalf....                                   
       The text that follows is written in ink over pencilled  drafting for
       'The Houses of Healing'.                                            
  12.  This sentence is bracketed in the original, as also is that a little
       further    on    ('a  tyrant  brooking    no    freedom   ...').
  13.  Imladrist: cf. p. 139 note 14 and p. 165 note 5.                    
  14.  My  father  struck   out  'Gandalf'   immediately.  He   then  wrote
       'Warden  of  the  Keys'  but  put  dots  for  the  name,  writing in
       'Hurin' before he  had gone  much further.  It would  seem therefore
       that this was where  the name  arose, but  since 'Hurin'  appears in
       the first manuscript of 'The Battle of the Pelennor Fields' (p. 369)
       it  seems  clear  that  my father  had merely  forgotten momentarily
       here what name he had chosen for him.                               
  15.  Gandalf  cannot  have  said  this.  Either  not  must be  removed or
       cannot > can.                                                       
  16.  In  a  draft  for  this  passage  Imrahil  called Dol  Amroth Castle
       Amroth;  this  was  repeated  in  a  following  draft, where  it was
       changed to Barad Amroth (and finally Barad > Dol).                  
  17.  Merry  of  course  knew  that Aragorn  did go  to Dunharrow  (cf. RK
       pp.  69  -  70;  the final  text of  'The Muster  of Rohan'  was now
       largely in being, p. 319). See p. 417.                              
  18.  This  passage  contrasts  greatly  with  RK, where  it is  Gimli who
       will  not  speak  of the  Paths of  the Dead,  and Legolas  who says
       'I  felt  not  the  horror,  and I  feared not  the shadows  of Men,
       powerless and frail as I deemed them.' See p. 417.                  
  19.  I  think  that  the  parting  of  Aragorn and  Eowyn would  not have
       been recounted so fully by Legolas and  Gimli here  if the  story of
       the  coming  of  the  Grey  Company  to  Dunharrow  already  existed
       in   the   earlier  chapter   (RK  pp.   56  -   9);  see   p.  308.
  20.  our horses that the  Rohirrim gave  us: 'horses',  because Aragorn's
       horse was still Hasufel (pp. 301, 305  - 6);  when Roheryn,  his own
       horse  brought from  the North  by the  Rangers, was  introduced, it
       was only  Arod, the  horse bearing  Legolas and  Gimli, that  was of
       Rohan,  and  he  alone  is  mentioned in  the equivalent  passage in
       RK ('The Passing of the Grey Company', p. 60).                      
  21.  In the early drafts for  'The King  of the  Golden Hall'  the mounds
       of the kings at Edoras were first described  as 'white  with nodding
       flowers  like  tiny  snowdrops',  the  flowers   being  subsequently
       nifredil  (VII.442-3).  In RK  ('The Passing  of the  Grey Company',
       p. 61) Aragorn calls the flowers simbelmyne', but  cf. 'The  King of

       the  Golden  Hall'  (TT  p.  111),   where  Gandalf   says:  'Evermind
       they are called, simbelmyne'  in this  land of  Men, for  they blossom
       in all the seasons of the year, and grow where dead men rest.'           
  22.  In  the  first manuscript  of 'The  King of  the Golden  Hall' Legolas
       said  of  the  barrows  at  Edoras:  'Seven  mounds  I see,  and seven
       long lives of men it is, since the golden hall was built' (see VII.442
       and  449  note  4).  This  was  changed  on  that  manuscript  to  the
       reading  of  TT  (p.111):  "  Seven  mounds upon  the left,  and nine
       upon the right," said Aragorn.  "Many long  lives of  men it  is since
       the golden hall was built." '                                            
  23.  If this is so, it was of course at this time that the first manuscript
       of  'The  King  of  the  Golden Hall'  was emended  to say  that there
       were  'seven  mounds  upon  the left,  and nine  upon the  right' (see
       note 22).                                                               1
  24.  The dates of  the kings  before the  last three  were so  much changed  ]
       and confused by  overwriting that  I can  form no  clear idea  of what  j
       my  father  intended:  it  is  at  least  plain,  however,  that  they
       correspond  in  their pattern to  those in  LR -  as adjusted  for the
       Shire Reckoning.                                                         
  25.  Barad Amroth: see note 16. Later Barad was changed to Dol.               
  26.  As first written, but  immediately rejected,  the text  continued from  i
       this  point:  ...  was  brought  from  Numenor,  and  marks  still the  l
       place  where  Isildur  met  the  last  king  of  the  Dark Men  of the
       Mountains,   when   he   established   the   bounds  of   Gondor.  And
       there he swore an oath,  for Isildur  and Elendil  and his  sons [sic]
       had  the  gift  of  tongues  as  many  of  the  Numenoreans,  and  the
       tongues of men..... [?of the wild] were known to him, for'               
  27.  The  ring-wall  and  tower on  the Hill  of Erech,  in which  was kept
       the palantir, are referred to in the outline  given on  p. 397;  it is
       told there that Aragorn  actually found  the palantir  of Erech,  in a
       vault of the tower.                                                      
  28.  It  is  strange  that  it should  be Elrohir  who unfurled  the banner
       (and  bore it  at the  Hornburg), for  from the  first mention  of the
       banner  (p.  302) it  was as  in RK  Halbarad the  Ranger who  bore it
       (and it was  covered in  a black  cloth). -  In RK  (p. 63)  no device
       could be seen on it in the darkness.                                     
  29.  On  this  and subsequent  references to  the days  of the  journey see
       the Note on Chronology at the end of these Notes.                        
  30.  Tarlang's  Neck  is  seen  on  the  Second  Map,  though  it   is  not
       named. For the geography of these regions see pp. 433 ff.                
  31.  Sixty  leagues  in direct  line from  Erech to  Linhir, and  a hundred
       miles  from  Linhir  to  Pelargir,  agrees with  RK (p.  150): 'ninety
       leagues and three' from Erech to Pelargir.
  32.  we set out again: i.e. from Erech.  - It  is approximately  here that
       the part  of Gimli's  story that  was transferred  to 'The  Passing of
       the  Grey  Company'  ends,  and  the   part  that   remained  actually

            
                                                                        
 reported  in  'The  Last  Debate' begins;  there is  some overlap  in RK
 (pp. 63, 151).                                                          
 33.    At this point there follows in the initial draft:
        '... But when we came over Tarlang's Neck Elladan and two
        Rangers rode ahead and spoke to any that they could find
        willing to stay and listen to them, and told them that a great
        help was coming to them against the Shipfoes and the South-
        rons, and that it was not the King of the Dead but the heir of
        the Kings of Gondor that had returned. A few listened and
        believed, and at the crossings of Kiril we found food and
        fodder set for our need though no man had dared to stay beside
        it, nor any fresh horses for which we hoped.
 34. The square brackets are in the original. The initial draft text has
     here:
      '"... but they wield living swords." And some cried [struck
      out: though they knew not what it meant): "The Lord of the
      Rings has arisen".'
   In the margin of this page in the draft text my father subsequently
   wrote the following remarkable passage:
     'Indeed all the folk of Lebennin call Aragorn that.'
     'I wonder why?' said Merry. 'I suppose it is some device to
   draw the eyes of Mordor that way, to Aragorn, and keep them
   from Frodo'; and he looked east and shuddered. 'Do you think
   all his great labour and deeds will be in vain and too late in the
   end?' he said.
     'I know not,' said Gimli. 'But one thing I know, and that is,
   not for any device of policy would Aragorn set abroad a false
   tale. Then either it is true and he has a ring, or it is a false tale
   invented by someone else. But Elrohir and Elladan have called
   him by that name. So it must be true. But what it means we do
   not know.'
 There is nothing on this page of the draft, or indeed anywhere in
 the manuscript, that this can refer to but the cry 'The Lord of the
 Rings has arisen'. I have found only one scrap of writing that
 seems to bear on this. Under the text in ink of a piece of rough
 drafting (that referred to in note 39) for the beginning of the story
 of the march from Minas Tirith are a few furiously pencilled
 lines, parts of which can be read:
   Galadriel must give her ring to Aragorn ( ..... to wed
   Finduilas?). Hence his sudden access of power ....... [?that
   won't work. It will leave] Lorien defenceless also Lord of the
   Ring will be too ...
 This raises many more questions than it answers; but it cannot be
 unconnected with the strange suggestion that in Lebennin Ara-
 gorn was called 'The Lord of the Ring(s)'. I do not know whether
 it is significant that in the first draft the s of Rings was not written

       consecutively  with  Ring,  but  was  added  to   the  word   -  maybe
       immediately.   This  however   only  raises   the  question   why,  if
       Aragorn  was  called 'The  Lord of  the Ring'  because it  was thought
       that he possessed a  Ring, did  my father  change it  to 'The  Lord of
       the  Rings'?  The  only  and  rather desperate  suggestion I  can make
       is that he wished to mark the  confusion of  mind on  the part  of the
       people  who  uttered  this  cry  (cf.  'though they  knew not  what it
       meant' in the draft text).                                            
  35.  The initial draft  has here:  'and all  of the  enemies that  were not
       slain  or  drowned  were  flying  away  over  the Poros  into Lothland
       desert.' This name is not perfectly clear, but I take it as certain in
       view  of  the  occurrence  of  Lothlann  on  the  First  Map {VII.309,
       313);  the  form  Lothland  is  found   in  the   Quenta  Silmarillion
       (V.264,  283).  On  the  Second  Map  (p.  435)  the  region  south of
       Mordor  is  named,  but  in pencil  now so  faint that  it is  hard to
       be  sure  of  the  name:  the likeliest  interpretation is  'Desert of
       Lostladen' (cf. the Etymologies, V.370, stem LUS).                   
  36.  Legolas  says  in  this  second  version  that  the  day they  came to
       Pelargir  was  'the  fifth of  our journey',  whereas in  the previous
       version (p. 413) 'it was the fourth  since we  left Dunharrow';  but 1
       think  that  both  expressions  mean  the  same   (see  the   Note  on
       Chronology below).                                                    
  37.  The original primary draft reaches this point:                        
            'And  when  all  was  won Aragorn  let sound  a host  of trumpets
       from  the  ship  that  he  took  for  himself,  and behold  the Shadow
       host  drew  near  to  the  shore,  and  all  others  fled   away.  But
       Aragorn  set  a  line  of  torches  along  the  shore  and  these they
       would  not  pass,  and  he  spoke  to  the  Dead  Men:  "Now   I  will
       count  the  oath  fulfilled,"  he  said,   "when  every   stranger  of
       Harad  or  of  Umbar  is  hunted  out  of  this  land west  of Anduin.
       When  that  is  done  go  back  and  trouble  never the  valleys again
       - but go and be at rest."                                             
       With  this  cf.  the  rejected  portion  of the  outline given  at the
       beginning  of  this  chapter   (note  6   above):  'The   Shadow  Host
       disperses,    pursuing    the    Haradwaith    about    the    vales.'
  38.  and justified the wisdom of Elrond: see p. 387.                       
  39.  In a rough draft for this passage Aragorn speaks  to Berithil:  'It is
       not yet my part to judge you, Master Berithil. If I  return I  will do
       so with justice. But for  this present  you shall  leave the  guard in
       the Citadel and go out to war.'                                       
  40.  The      square      brackets      are      in      the      original.
  41.  in  our  speech  was  corrected  to  in  the  old  speech  of Numenor,
       then changed back to in our speech.                                   
  42.  Legolas  now  plays  no  part  in  the  narration  until  Pelargir  is
       reached.                                                              
  43.  The  story  in  this  version  is  expressly  to  be  Gimli's:  at the

                  
                                                                              
      beginning,  in  response  to  Pippin's  'Won't  you  tell us  some more?'
      he says: 'Well, if you must hear the tale, I will tell it briefly.' As in
      the  unrevised  typescript  (note  42)  Legolas  says  nothing  until  he
      breaks  in  on  Gimli  at  his  mention of  the Great  River ('I  knew it
      long  ere  we  reached  it',  p.  414);  but  by  an  alteration  to this
      revised  version  he  breaks  silence  at  Gimli's  words  '[we]  went as
      swiftly  as  our  stouthearted  horses  could endure  over the  plains of
      Lebennin':                                                               
         'Lebennin!'  cried  Legolas.  All  the  while  he  had  kept  silence,
      gazing   away   southward,   while   Gimli  spoke;   but  now   he  began
      to sing: Silver flow the streams from Celos to Erui ...                 
      The text of his song is at once in the final  form. In  RK it  is Legolas
      who  tells  the  whole  story  up  to  this  point,  and  Gimli  who here
      takes it up.                                                             
  44. The  place  where  Kiril  was  crossed  was  named  on  the   Second  Map
      Caerost on Kiril (p. 437).                                               
  45. On  the  back  of  the  last  page  of this  typescript is  the following
      remarkable passage, on which  I can  cast no  light. It  is written  in a
      fine  ornate  script, together  with other  odds and  ends of  phrases in
      the same script,  characteristic of  my father's  habit of  'doodling' in
      this way (cf. VII.379):                                                  
        Then   spoke   Elessar:   Many   Guthrond   would   hold    that   your
      insolence   merited   rather   punishment    than   answer    from   your
      king;  but  since  you  have  in   open  malice   uttered  lies   in  the
      hearing  of many,  I will  first lay  bare their  falsehood, so  that all
      here   may   know   you   for  what   you  are,   and  have   ever  been.
      Afterwards   maybe  a   chance  shall   be  given   you  to   repent  and
      turn from your old evil.                                                 
  46. The  title that  my father  first chose  for the  chapter when  the final
      structure   had   been   reached   was   'Tidings   and   Counsel':   the
      'tidings'  of  Gimli and  Legolas, and  the 'counsel'  of Gandalf  at the
      debate of the lords.                                                     

                           Note on the Chronology.                         
                                                                          
 In the outline 'The march of Aragorn and the defeat of the Haradrim'      
 (pp. 397 - 9) the dates of Aragorn's journey are as follows:              
  March.                                                                   
                                                                          
   8. (morning).             Enters the Paths of the Dead.                 
      (midnight).            Comes to Erech.                               
   9. (early morning).       Leaves Erech under the Darkness from.         
                                                                          
                             Mordor.                                       
                                                                          
  10. (evening).             Reaches Linhir.                               
  11. (morning).             Crosses River Lameduin into Lebennin.         
  12. (early morning).       Reaches Pelargir.                             

 13. (early morning). Sets out up river from Pelargir.                       
 14. (early morning). 100 miles up river.                                    
 15. (early morning). Wind rises and sails hoisted on the ships;            
                            c. 9 a.m. fleet is seen from Minas Tirith.     
 The latter  part of  this chronology  seems obviously  unsatisfactory, in
 that the fleet is 100 miles up Anduin in the early  morning of  March 14,
 and yet nothing is said of any further journeying on  the 14th:  the last
 stretch is accomplished under sail on  the morning  of the  15th. Against
 this date (p. 399) my  father wrote  '14'; and  in the  companion outline
 'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Forannest'  (p.  360)  the  charge   of  the
 Rohirrim  on  the  15th  was  likewise changed  to the  14th -  which was
 the date in 'The Siege of Gondor', p. 342.                               
 With  the  date  of  Aragorn's  entering the  Paths of  the Dead  cf. pp.
 309  and  311,  notes  9  and  18 (February  6 =  March 8).  The Dawnless
 Day is still March 9 (cf. p. 342).                                       
 In  the  manuscript  of  'The  Tale  of  Gimli  and Legolas'  this chron-
 ology is preserved  - with  March 14  as the  date of  the Battle  of the
 Pelennor Fields. Thus Gimli tells that  the Company  came to  Erech 'just
 ere the midnight hour - and black it was wellnigh as in the  caverns, for
 though  we  did  not  know  it yet  the darkness  of Mordor  was creeping
 over us' (p. 410),  and again  (p. 412):  'The next  morning day  did not
 dawn' (in the margin of  the manuscript  the figure  9 is  written here).
 'At nightfall of  the second  day from  Erech' they  came to  Linhir (and
 here 10 is written in the margin). They 'rose ere night had passed' (i.e.
 before dawn on  March 11)  and rode  across Lebennin,  'all that  day and
 through the next night'; and Gimli says that 'it was  day, I  guessed, by
 the  hidden  sun  - the  fourth since  we left  Dunharrow' (p.  413) when
 they  reached  the  shores  of Anduin  at Pelargir,  i.e. the  morning of
 March 12. 'Before the fifth day was over we had taken  well nigh  all the
 fleet', which as will be seen in  a moment  means 'the  fifth day  of the
 journey', i.e. March 12.                                                 
 The first version  of the  events at  Pelargir ends  here; in  the second
 version Legolas says (note  36) that  the day  they reached  Pelargir was
 'the fifth of our journey' (March 12), that they rested that night 'while
 others laboured' - but also that the fleet set out up Anduin 'on the fifth
 morning,  that  is  the  day  before  yesterday'  (March 13).  This shows
 clearly that Legolas  was distinguishing  between 'the  fifth day  of our
 journey  (March  12)  and  the  fifth  morning  since  we  left Dunharrow
 (March 13) - so also in RK (p. 153)  'the sixth  [morning] since  we rode
 from Dunharrow' is the seventh  day of  the whole  journey. Since  it was
 now  the  day  after the  Battle of  the Pelennor  Fields, and  the fleet
 left Pelargir on 'the  day before  yesterday', the  battle took  place on
 March 14.                                                                
 The difference of this chronology from that of LR is therefore thus:     

                      The journey of Aragorn                              
            The present chronology Chronology of LR.                      
 Day March.                                                               
 1. 8.  Reaches Erech at midnight The same.                                  
 2. 9.  The Dawnless Day.                                                    
 3. 10. Reaches Linhir  The Dawnless Day.                                   
 4. 11. Reaches Linhir.                                                    
 5. 12. Reaches Pelargir.                                                   
 6. 13. Sets out from Pelargir Reaches Pelargir.                            
 7. 14. Battle of the Pelennor Fields Sets out from Pelargir.               
 8. 15. Battle of the Pelennor Fields.                                     
                                                                         
 In  the  chronology  of  the  manuscript   text  Aragorn's   journey  from
 Dunharrow  to  Pelargir  took four  days and  nights, reaching  the Anduin
 on the fifth day, and setting out  up river  on the  morning of  the sixth
 day. In LR Aragorn took three  days, not  two, from  Erech to  Linhir, and
 so  five days  and nights  to Pelargir.  Thus in  the manuscript  (p. 411)
 Gimli says  that from  Erech 'then  followed the  weariest journey  that I
 have  ever  known...  three  days  and  nights and  on into  another day',
 whereas  when  in  RK  (p.  150)  Legolas  speaks of  the great  ride from
 Erech to Pelargir he says: 'Four days and nights, and on into a  fifth, we
 rode from the Black Stone'.                                              
 Lastly,  whereas  in  the  manuscript  text  the  Darkness  out  of Mordor
 came over  the sky  during the  night of  March 8,  and 'the  next morning
 day did not dawn', in RK  (p. 151)  'one day  of light  we rode,  and then
 came the  day without  dawn' (and  in the  earlier passage  at the  end of
 'The  Passing  of  the  Grey Company',  RK p.  63, in  the evening  of the
 day  on  which  they  left Erech  at dawn  'the sun  went down  like blood
 behind  Pinnath  Gelin  away  in  the  West  behind  them', and  'the next
 day there came no dawn').                                                

                                   XIII.                                
                                                                         
                            THE BLACK GATE OPENS.                         
                                                                         
 As  I  have  explained  in the  last chapter  (p. 416),  the story  of the
 journey  to  the  Morannon,  the  parley  with  the  Lieutenant  of Barad-
 dur, and the attack on the Host of the West in  the slag-hills  before the
 Gate,  was  written  before  my  father  made  any  move  to break  up and
 reorganize  the  presentation  of the  narrative in  the single  very long
 chapter,  which  would  ultimately  be  distributed  between  'The Passing
 of the Grey Company', 'The Last Debate', and 'The Black Gate Opens'.     
  For  the  conclusion  of  Book  V  he  had in  fact already  written some
 time  before a  very full  outline ('The  Story Foreseen  from Forannest',
 pp. 360 - 2), and this, when he came to write  the narrative,  he followed
 remarkably  closely. Already  present in  the outline  were the  coming of
 the  vanguard  to  Minas  Morghul  and  the  burning  of the  lands about,
 the  silence  that  followed  the  summons  to   Sauron  to   come  forth,
 the  embassy   from  the   Dark  Tower   already  prepared,   the  display
 of  Frodo's  mithril  coat, the  blackmailing terms  for the  surrender of
 Frodo, Gandalf's  refusal to  treat and  taking of  the mithril  coat, and
 the hosts  lying ready  in ambush.  The chief  differences from  the final
 story  were  the  coming  of  the  Ents  (with  Elves  of  Lorien)  to the
 Morannon  (with  an  express  declaration  by  the  ambassador  of  Sauron
 that  the  Ents  shall  help  to  rebuild  Isengard),  uncertainty whether
 Merry  and  Pippin  were  present,  and  the  person  of  the  ambassador:
 doubtfully identified as  the Wizard  King (implying  a different  view of
 the  outcome  of  his  encounter  with Eowyn  and Merry  in the  Battle of
 the Pelennor Fields), but certainly a Nazgul  ('flinging off  his garments
 he vanishes').                                                           
  For  the  narrative  there  is both  initial draft  and fair  copy, which
 doubtless  belong  to  the  same  time,  since  the  first  two  pages are
 common  to  both:  from  the  point  where the  first text  became quicker
 and rougher my father replaced it; but in the first draft the story  as it
 stands  in  RK  was  already  present  in  almost  every  point. Aragorn's
 dismissal of the faint-hearted (as it is described in  The Tale  of Years)
 was  however  (in  both  texts)   Gandalf's,  and   the  cause   of  their
 faint-heartedness more immediate (cf. RK p. 162):                        
                                                                         
 ... and they  could descry  the marshes  and the  desert that            
 stretched  north  and  west  to  the Emyn  Muil. And  now the            
 Nazgul  swept down  over them  unceasingly, and  often daring            
 within bowshot of the earth they would plunge shrieking down,            

                                                                     
                                                                          
 and their fell voices made even the boldest blench. Some there            
 were who were  so unmanned  that they  could neither  walk nor            
 ride further north.                                                       
                                                                          
 This survived into the fair copy,  where it  was replaced  by the  text of
 RK (p. 162), in  which the  Nazgul did  not closely  approach the  Host of
 the West until the final attack on the Slag-hills. In the draft text it is
 said  that  'some  500  left  the  host' and  went off  south-west towards
 Cair Andros.                                                              
  No  more  is  said  in  the  draft of  the history  of the  Lieutenant of
 Baraddur,(1) the nameless Mouth of  Sauron, than  that 'It  is told  that he
 was  a  living  man, who  being-captured as  a youth  became a  servant of
 the  Dark  Tower,  and  because  of his  cunning grew  high in  the Lord's
 favour  ...'  In  the  fair  copy  this  was  repeated,  but  was  changed
 subsequently to: 'But it is said that he was  a renegade,  son of  a house
 of  wise  and  noble  men  in  Gondor,  who  becoming  enamoured  of  evil
 knowledge  entered  the  service  of the  Dark Tower,  and because  of his
 cunning [and  the fertile  cruelty of  his mind]  [and servility]  he grew
 ever  higher  in  the  Lord's  favour  ...'  (these  phrases   being  thus
 bracketed  in the  original). In  RK (p.  164) the  Mouth of  Sauron 'came
 of the race of those that are named the Black Numenoreans'.(2)            
                                                                          
                                   NOTES.                                  
                                                                          
 1. First  written  'the  Lieutenant   of  Morgul',   but  this   may  very
    probably have been no more than a slip.                                
 2. A  few  other  minor  points  may  be  mentioned  together.  The Morgul
    Pass  (RK  p.  161)  is  called  'the Pass  of Kirith  Ungol' in  the fair
    copy,  and  the  Pass  of  Cirith  Gorgor  (RK  p.  162)  is 'the  Pass of
    Gorgoroth'  in  both  texts,  changed  to 'the  Pass of  Kirith-Gorgor' in
    the   fair   copy.   In   the   draft   text   Damrod  of   Henneth  Annun
    reappears  again,  with Mablung,  as a  leader of  the scouts  in Ithilien
    (RK  p. 162);  the host  can see  from their  camp on  the last  night the
    red  lights  in  the  Towers  of  the Teeth;  and in  Gandalf's concluding
    words  to  the  Mouth  of  Sauron  (RK  p.  167) he  retains the  words he
    used in the  original outline  (p. 362):  'Begone! But  let fear  eat your
    heart: for if you so much as set  a thorn  in the  flesh of  your prisoner
    you shall rue it through all ages.'                                    
                                                                          
                       Note on the Chronology                              
                                                                          
 In The Tale of Years in LR the following dates are given:                 
 March 18. The Host of the West marches from Minas Tirith.                  
       19. The Host comes to Morgul-vale.                                  
       23. The Host passes out of Ithilien. Aragorn dismisses the          
           faint-hearted.                                                  

                                                                      
                                                                          
       24. The Host camps in the Desolation of the Morannon.                
       25. The Host is surrounded on the Slag-hills.                        
 In both manuscript texts the  same indications  of date  are given,  and in
 the  same  words,  as  in  RK,  except  in  one point.  The Host  here left
 Minas  Tirith on  17 March  (this date  being written  in the  margin), and
 since this was two days after 'the  Last Debate',  which itself  took place
 on the day after the battle, the date of the Battle of the  Pelennor Fields
 was here the  14th of  March, not  the 15th  (see p.  428). In  the present
 versions, however, the difference of one day in the  date of  the departure
 from Minas  Tirith is  soon lost,  for this  reason: where  in RK  (p. 160)
 the  first  day's  march  ended  five  miles  beyond  Osgiliath,  but  'the
 horsemen  pressed  on  and  ere  evening  they  came  to  the  Cross Roads'
 (i.e. 18 March), it is said  here that  'Next day  the horsemen  pressed on
 and ere  evening they  came to  the Cross  Roads' (i.e.  18 March);  and it
 was again 'on the next day' that  'the main  host came  up' (with  the date
 '19' in the margin). Thus where it is said in RK (p.  161) 'The  day after,
 being  the  third  day  since  they  set  out from  Minas Tirith,  the army
 began its northward march along  the road',  it is  here 'the  fourth day',
 with the date '20' written in the margin.                                 
                                                                          
             The present version.                The Return of the King.                  
      March 17. March begins, and ends                                      
                at Osgiliath.                                                
                                              

                
 18. Horsemen  reach the
     Cross   Roads   before
     evening.              

                                   March begins, and ends near
                                   Osgiliath, but the horsemen
                                   go on and reach the Cross
                                   Roads before evening.      
             

       19. Main host comes to the Cross Roads.                       
       20. The host begins northward march.                          
                                                                   
  It may be noted lastly that where in RK  (p. 163)  on the  night of
 24 March 'the waxing moon  was four  nights old',  here it  was 'but
 three days from the full moon' on the night before the day  on which
 the Ring was destroyed.                                            

                                     XIV.                                   
                                                                           
                                THE SECOND MAP.                             
                                                                           
 Whenever  this  map   was  first   made,  it   was  certainly   my  father's
 working  map  during  the  writing  of  Book V  of The  Lord of  the Rings.(1)
 The first stage in its making was carried out  in black  ink, but  black ink
 was also used later, and since it was not  drawn and  lettered at  its first
 making with the meticulousness of  the earlier  stages of  the First  Map it
 is scarcely possible to isolate the layers of accretion  by this  means. Red
 ink was also  used for  a few  alterations, and  in the  final stage  of its
 useful  life  corrections  and  additions  were  very  roughly made  in blue
 ink (also in blue crayon and pencil).                                      
   The  single  sheet  of  paper  on  which  it  was  made  is now,  after so
 much  use  many  years  ago,  limp,  torn, wrinkled,  stained,  and  rubbed,
 and some  of the  later pencillings  can scarcely  be seen.  It is  ruled in
 squares  of  2  cm.  side  (=  100  miles), the  squares being  lettered and
 numbered  according  to  the  First  Map.  In  my  redrawing I  have divided
 it into a western and  an eastern  portion, with  the central  vertical line
 of squares (14} repeated.                                                  
   The attempt to redraw it  posed difficulties.  In places  there is  such a
 cobweb  of  fine  crisscrossing  and  competing  lines  (the  'contours' are
 very  impressionistic)  as to  bewilder the  eye, and  the redrawing  had to
 be  done  while  holding  a  lens; even  so, I  have certainly  not followed
 every last  wiggle with  fidelity. Here  and there  it is  hard to  make out
 what  the  markings actually  are or  to interpret  what they  represent. In
 the  region  south  of  the  White  Mountains  the   map  is   so  extremely
 crowded,  and  there  are  so  many  alterations  and  additions   of  names
 made  at different  times, that  (since a  primary aim  of the  redrawing is
 clarification)  I  have  found  it  best  to  omit  a  number  of  names and
 explain the changes in  the account  of the  map that  follows; and  for the
 same  reason  I  have  shown  the  new  course  of  Anduin  at  Minas Tirith
 but  not  the  new  sites  of  Barad-dur  and  Mount  Doom.   The  redrawing
 is  therefore  avowedly  inconsistent  in  what  is shown  and what  is not,
 but I think inevitably so;  and the  following notes  are an  essential part
 of its presentation.                                                       
   I  refer  to  the  map  of  Rohan,  Gondor  and  Mordor  published  in The
 Return of the King as 'the large LR map'.                                  
   The  account  of  the  Rivers  of  Gondor  written  on  this map  has been
 given in Vol. VII (p. 312) in a discussion of peculiarities in  the original
 conception  of  the  southern  rivers,  but since  in reducing  my redrawing

                    (The Second Map (West).)

                   (The Second Map (East).)

 to the size of the printed page the writing becomes extremely small I     
 repeat it here:                                                           
                                                                          
   Rivers of Gondor                                                        
   Anduin                                                                  
    From East                                                              
   Ithilduin or Duin Morghul                                               
   Poros Boundary                                                         
      From West                                                            
   Ereg First                                                              
   Sirith                                              The 5 rivers        
                                                                          
    Lameduin (of Lamedon) with tributaries             of lebennin                     
    Serni (E.) and Kelos (W.)                                               
   Ringlo, Kiril, Morthond and Calenhir that                               
    all flow into Cobas Haven                                              
   Lhefneg Fifth                                                           
    In counting only the mouths are counted: Ereg 1, Sirith 2, Lame-       
    duin 3, Morthond 4, Lhefneg 5, Isen 6, Gwathlo 7.                       
                                                                          
   Ereg (later Erui) has now essentially its final place and course; Sirith
 likewise, but with  no western  tributary (Kelos  on the  large LR  map) -
 the  lines  on  the  map  in  this  valley  are  a dense  maze and  I have
 simplified them in the redrawing, but  it is  clear that  there is  only a
 single  stream.  Lossarnach  seems  to  have  been  a  much  larger region
 than it is on the LR maps, but  this may  be due  merely to  the lettering
 of a long name in a small space.                                          
   Lameduin, while clearly written with final -n in the list of  rivers (as
 also in the text given on pp. 397 ff.) is equally clearly  written Lamedui
 on the map itself, and should perhaps have been so represented. It is also
 clear that there are three  tributary streams  marked, although  only two,
 Serni and Kelos, are referred to in  the list  (and there  is no  place for
 another in 'the  five rivers  of Lebennin');  only the  easternmost, Serni,
 is named on the map.  All three  join together  at a  place marked  with a
 black dot (R 12), though this was at first given no name (see below).     
   Ringlo,  Kiril,  and Morthond  have essentially  the final  courses; but
 Kiril is not a tributary of Ringlo as it is on the LR  maps, and  a fourth
 river,  unnamed on  the map  but called  Calenhir in  the list  of rivers,
 comes  in  from  Pinnath Gelin  to the  westward. At  the junction  of the
 four streams the map  is very  hard to  interpret: it  is not  clear which
 rivers have joined at the place marked  by a  black dot  (Q 11)  and which
 flow  independently  into  Cobas  Haven,  the  bay  north  of  Dol Amroth.
 Beside  the  dot  (in  small  lettering as  if referring  to the  dot) was
 originally  written  Lamedon,  which  was  struck  through,  and  which  I
 think  was probably  a simple  error (in  view of  Lameduin many  miles to
 the  east).  Above  Lamedon  was  written  Linhir,  also  struck  through.
 The earliest reference to Linhir in the texts is found in the outline 'The

                   
                                                                        
 Story  Foreseen  from  Forannest' (p.  361), where  the Darkness  out of
 Mordor  is  seen  by the  Ents as  'a great  blackness ...  extending in
 breadth from Rauros to Linhir,  this could  imply the  earlier position,
 above   Cobas   Haven,  but   perhaps  more   probably  the   later,  on
 Lameduin  (Gilrain).  The  crossing of  Ringlo was  a later  addition in
 red ink.                                                                
  The  name  Lamedon  was  written  a  second  time across  R 13 (beneath
 Serni and  above  Lebennin),  and this  placing obviously  consorts with
 the  river-name  Lameduin.  In this  position it  was again  struck out,
 Lameduin  changed  to  Gilrain, and  Linhir written  against the  dot on
 R 12 where the three streams join. Lamedon was later written in  a third
 and final location (but see note 2) at the top of q 12, across the upper
 waters of Kiril and Ringlo.                                             
  The  emergence of  the new  geography can  be traced  in the  texts. In
 the  outline  'The march  of Aragorn  and defeat  of the  Haradrim' (see
 pp. 397 - 8 and note 4) occurs the following:                           
                                                                        
  Erech to  Fords of  Lameduin (say  Linhir?) is  175 miles  direct, about
  200 by road.... At Linhir on Lameduin men of Lebennin and              
  Lamedon are defending passage of river against Haradwaith.             
                                                                        
 When  this  was  written  Lamedon  still  lay north  of Ethir  Anduin, a
 northward   region   of  Lebennin,   and  'the   men  of   Lebennin  and
 Lamedon'  had  withdrawn  westwards  to  the  line  of the  river, which
 they were attempting to  hold. But  already in  the original  drafts for
 the  story  of  the  ride  of  the  Grey  Company  in 'The  Last Debate'
 (see  pp.  411 -  12) they  passed 'over  Tarlang's Neck  into Lamedon',
 Lameduin has become Gilrain, and (as in RK, p.  151) it  was the  men of
 Lamedon who contested the passage of Gilrain against the Haradrim.(2)   
  The  dot  near  the  bottom  right-hand  corner  of  P  11  marks Erech
 (named on the original); this was an addition, as was the  river flowing
 down from  Erech to  join the  course of  Morthond as  originally marked
 on P - Q 11. To the dot on the river Kiril (Q 12), a later  addition, is
 attached the pencilled name Caerost on Kiril;  this was  the forerunner
 of Calembel, where Kiril  was crossed  (RK p.  63). Neither  Caerost nor
 Calembel is found in the original manuscript of  'The Last  Debate' (see
 p.  419).  The other  dot on  Q12, east  of the  crossing of  Ringlo, is
 marked with the  pencilled name  Tarnost, which  so far  as I  know does
 not appear elsewhere.                                                   
  The name  Belfalas was  a late  addition (see  p. 293  note 22);  and a
 note added early to the map directs  that Pinnath  Gelin should  be made
 into 'lower Green Hills'.                                               
  The  name  Odotheg  'Seventh'  of  Gwathlo  or  Greyflood  was  changed
 in pencil to Odothui; on this name see VII.311 - 12. The last  letter of
 Lhefneg was also  changed: most  probably it  was first  written Lhefned
 and then immediately altered to  Lhefneg, the  form of  the name  in the
 list of rivers written on the map.                                      

    North  of  the  White  Mountains  a  line  of  dots  on  squares  P 13,        
  Q 13-14 represents the beacon hills; on this see p. 354 note 3.                  
    Moving  eastwards  to  Q14,  the  original  course  of  Anduin  can  be      j
  discerned on  the original,  running in  a straight  line from  below the        
  confluence  of   Ereg  to   where  the   river  bends   north-west  below        
  Osgiliath.  The  great  elbow  in Anduin  here and  the hills  of Haramon        
  that  caused  it  were  superimposed  later  in  blue ink,  Haramon being        
  afterwards  struck  out  and  Emyn Arnen  substituted (with  some totally        
  illegible name preceding it). In the original text of the  chapter 'Minas      j
  Tirith' (p. 278) there was no mention of this feature.  It is  shown (but        
  without  the  hills  around  which  the  river bends)  on the  little map        
  drawn  on  a  page  added  to  the  manuscript  of   'The  Ride   of  the        
  Rohirrim' (p. 353);  and it  first appears  in the  texts in  the outline        
  'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Forannest'  (see  p. 359  and note  3): 'the        
  [Pelennor] wall right above  the stream  which bends  round the  Hills of        
  Haramon'.  The  name  Emyn  Arnen  appears  in   the  drafting   of  'The        
  Battle of the Pelennor Fields' (p. 370). I have very little doubt that it        
  was indeed the development of the story  of the  battle that  brought the        
  great  bend  in  Anduin  around  the  hills  of  Haramon/Emyn  Arnen into        
  being; for so the black fleet could be  brought right  under the  wall of        
  the  Pelennor,  and  victory  assured  in  the  face  of disaster  by the        
  exceedingly  dramatic  and  utterly  unlooked  for  arrival, on  the very        
  field, of Aragorn with the Rangers and the  sons of  Elrond, and  all the        
  men newly gathered from the southern fiefs.                                      
    Osgiliath is now north-east of Minas Tirith  (see pp.  269 -  70, 353).        
  A  note  on  the  map  says  that  'Minas  Morgul  must  be  rather  more        
  north' (cf. the plan reproduced on p. 181 and the large LR map).          
    Within  the confines  of Mordor  a major  change was  made in  the last        
  stage of the use  of this  map. The  great peninsula  of high  land (Q16)        
  thrust  out   southwards  from   the  Ash   Mountains,  on   which  stood        
  Barad-dur,  was  struck  through,  and  Barad-dur  was  moved  north-west        
  (to  P 16).  This  was  where  Orodruin had  stood as  the map  was first        
  drawn.(3) Orodruin  was  moved  to  stand   near  the   bottom  right-hand        
  corner  of  P 15.  I have  in this  case preserved  the original  site of        
  Barad-dur  in my  redrawing, for  the alterations  were carried  out very        
  roughly. Other additions of this time were the rough  outline of  the Sea        
  of  Nurnen, the  names  Lithlad,  Morgai,  and  Nurn, and  also Gorgoroth        
  of  the  vale  running  back  from  the  Morannon.  Gorgoroth  was struck        
  out, and in its place was pencilled here the name Narch Udun.(4)                   
                                                                                  
                                    NOTES.                                         
                                                                                  
  1.  The fact that the track of Frodo's  journey from  the Emil  Muil to        
      the  Morannon  (not  shown  on  my   redrawing)  is   very  carefully        
      marked  and probably  belongs to  the first  'layer' does  not demon-        
      strate that in its making this map goes back to  the writing  of Book        

    IV. For one thing, it seems unlikely that  my father  would have
    made  the  map  redrawn on  p. 269  if the  Second Map  had been
    already in existence.                                           
 2. A name in scarcely visible pencilling that is almost certainly
    Lamedon can be seen written right across q 11  - 12  (from below
    the r  of Morthond  to east  of the  crossing of  Ringlo), which
    suggests that Lamedon was at first a larger region.             
 3. When Barad-dur was moved to the site of Orodruin  the original
    markings were obliterated.                                      
 4. The names Harad Road, Near  Harad (and  an arrow  directing to
    Far Harad), Desert of Lostladen (see p. 426 note 35), Khand (see
    p. 369), and Umbar were scribbled in pencil or blue crayon.     
