                  The Final Problem

  It is with a heavy heart that I take up my pen to write these the
last words in which I shall ever record the singular gifts by
which my friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes was distinguished. In an
incoherent and. as I deeply feel, an entirely inadequate fashion, I
have endeavoured to give some account of my strange experiences
in his company from the chance which first brought us together
at the period of the "Study in Scarlet," up to the time of his
interference in the matter of the "Naval Treaty" -- an interfer-
ence which had the unquestionable effect of preventing a serious
international complication. It was my intention to have stopped
there, and to have said nothing of that event which has created a
void in my life which the lapse of two years has done little to
fill. My hand has been forced, however, by the recent letters in
which Colonel James Moriarty defends the memory of his brother,
and I have no choice but to lay the facts before the public exactly
as they occurred. I alone know the absolute truth of the matter,
and I am satisfied that the time has come when no good purpose
is to be served by its suppression. As far as I know, there have
been only three accounts in the public press: that in the Journal
de Geneve on May 6th, 1891, the Reuter's dispatch in the
English papers on May 7th, and finally the recent letters to
which I have alluded. Of these the first and second were ex-
tremely condensed, while the last is, as I shall now show, an
absolute perversion of the facts. It lies with me to tell for the first
time what really took place between Professor Moriarty and Mr.
Sherlock Holmes.
  It may be remembered that after my marriage, and my subse-
quent start in private practice, the very intimate relations which
had existed between Holmes and myself became to some extent
modified. He still came to me from time to time when he desired
a companion in his investigations, but these occasions grew more
and more seldom, until I find that in the year 1890 there were
only three cases of which I retain any record. During the winter
of that year and the early spring of 1891, I saw in the papers that
he had been engaged by the French government upon a matter of
supreme importance, and I received two notes from Holmes,
dated from Narbonne and from Nimes, from which I gathered
that his stay in France was likely to be a long one. It was with
some surprise, therefore, that I saw him walk into my consulting-
room upon the evening of April 24th. It struck me that he was
looking even paler and thinner than usual.
  "Yes, I have been using myself up rather too freely," he
remarked, in answer to my look rather than to my words; "I
have been a little pressed of late. Have you any objection to my
closing your shutters?"
  The only light in the room came from the lamp upon the table
at which I had been reading. Holmes edged his way round the
wall, and, flinging the shutters together, he bolted them securely.
  "You are afraid of something?" I asked.
  "Well, I am."
  "Of what?"
  "Of air-guns."
  "My dear Holmes, what do you mean?"
  "I think that you know me well enough. Watson. to under-
stand that I am by no means a nervous man. At the same time, it
is stupidity rather than courage to refuse to recognize danger
when it is close upon you. Might I trouble you for a match?" He
drew in the smoke of his cigarette as if the soothing influence
was grateful to him.
  "I must apologize for calling so late," said he, "and I must
further beg you to be so unconventional as to allow me to leave
your house presently by scrambling over your back garden wall."
  "But what does it all mean?" I asked.
  He held out his hand, and I saw in the light of the lamp that
two of his knuckles were burst and bleeding.
  "It's not an airy nothing, you see," said he. smiling. "On the
contrary, it is solid enough for a man to break his hand over. Is
Mrs. Watson in?"
  "She is away upon a visit."
  "Indeed! You are alone?"
  "Quite."
  "Then it makes it the easier for me to propose that you should
come away with me for a week to the Continent."
  "Where?"
  "Oh, anywhere. It's all the same to me."
  There was something very strange in all this. It was not
Holmes's nature to take an aimless holiday, and something
about his pale, worn face told me that his nerves were at their
highest tension. He saw the question in my eyes, and, putting his
finger-tips together and his elbows upon his knees, he explained
the situation.
  "You have probably never heard of Professor Moriarty?" said
he.
  "Never."
  "Ay, there's the genius and the wonder of the thing!" he
cried. "The man pervades London, and no one has heard of him.
That's what puts him on a pinnacle in the records of crime. I tell
you Watson, in all seriousness, that if I could beat that man, if I
could free society of him, I should feel that my own career had
reached its summit, and I should be prepared to turn to some
more placid line in life. Between ourselves, the recent cases in
which I have been of assistance to the royal family of Scandina-
via, and to the French republic, have left me in such a position
that I could continue to live in the quiet fashion which is most
congenial to me, and to concentrate my attention upon my
chemical researches. But I could not rest. Watson, I could not sit
quiet in my chair, if I thought that such a man as Professor
Moriarty were walking the streets of London unchallenged."
  "What has he done, then?"
  "His career has been an extraordinary one. He is a man of
good birth and excellent education. endowed by nature with a
phenomenal mathematical faculty. At the age of twenty-one he
wrote a treatise upon the binomial theorem, which has had a
European vogue. On the strength of it he won the mathematical
chair at one of our smaller universities, and had, to all appear-
ances, a most brilliant career before him. But the man had
hereditary tendencies of the most diabolical kind. A criminal
strain ran in his blood, which, instead of being modified, was
increased and rendered infinitely more dangerous by his extraor-
dinary mental powers. Dark rumours gathered round him in the
university town, and eventually he was compelled to resign his
chair and to come down to London, where he set up as an army
coach. So much is known to the world, but what I am telling you
now is what I have myself discovered.
  "As you are aware, Watson, there is no one who knows the
higher criminal world of London so well as I do. For years past I
have continually been conscious of some power behind the male-
factor, some deep organizing power which forever stands in the
way of the law, and throws its shield over the wrong-doer. Again
and again in cases of the most varying sorts -- forgery cases,
robberies, murders -- I have felt the presence of this force, and I
have deduced its action in many of those undiscovered crimes in
which I have not been personally consulted. For years I have
endeavoured to break through the veil which shrouded it, and at
last the time came when l seized my thread and followed it, until
it led me. after a thousand cunning windings, to ex-Professor
Moriarty, of mathematical celebrity.
  "He is the Napoleon of crime, Watson. He is the organizer of
half that is evil and of nearly all that is undetected in this great
city. He is a genius, a philosopher, an abstract thinker. He has a
brain of the first order. He sits motionless, like a spider in the
centre of its web, but that web has a thousand radiations, and he
knows well every quiver of each of them. He does little himself.
He only plans. But his agents are numerous and splendidly
organized. Is there a crime to be done, a paper to be abstracted,
we will say, a house to be rifled, a man to be removed -- the
word is passed to the professor, the matter is organized and
carried out. The agent may be caught. In that case money is
found for his bail or his detence. But the central power which
uses the agent is never caught -- never so much as suspected.
This was the organization which I deduced, Watson, and which I
devoted my whole energy to exposing and breaking up.
  "But the professor was fenced round with safeguards so cun-
ningly devised that, do what I would, it seemed impossible to get
evidence which would convict in a court of law. You know my
powers, my dear Watson, and yet at the end of three months I
was forced to confess that I had at last met an antagonist who
was my intellectual equal. My horror at his crimes was lost in
my admiration at his skill. But at last he made a trip -- only a
little, little trip but it was more than he could afford, when I
was so close upon him. I had my chance, and, starting from that
point, I have woven my net round him until now it is all ready to
close. In three days -- that is to say, on Monday next -- matters
will be ripe, and the professor, with all the principal members of
his gang, will be in the hands of the police. Then will come the
greatest criminal trial of the century, the clearing up of over forty
mysteries, and the rope for all of them; but if we move at all
prematurely, you understand, they may slip out of our hands
even at the last moment.
  "Now, if I could have done this without the knowledge of
Professor Moriarty, all would have been well. But he was too
wily for that. He saw every step which I took to draw my toils
round him. Again and again he strove to break away, but I as
often headed him off. I tell you, my friend, that if a detailed
account of that silent contest could be written, it would take its
place as the most brilliant bit of thrust-and-parry work in the
history of detection. Never have I risen to such a height, and
never have I been so hard pressed by an opponent. He cut deep,
and yet I just undercut him. This morning the last steps were
taken, and three days only were wanted to complete the busi-
ness. I was sitting in my room thinking the matter over when the
door opened and Professor Moriarty stood before me.
  "My nerves are fairly proof, Watson, but I must confess to a
start when I saw the very man who had been so much in my
thoughts standing there on my threshold. His appearance was
quite familiar to me. He is extremely tall and thin, his forehead
domes out in a white curve, and his two eyes are deeply sunken
in his head. He is clean-shaven, pale, and ascetic-looking, re-
taining something of the professor in his features. His shoulders
are rounded from much study, and his face protrudes forward
and is forever slowly oscillating from side to side in a curiously
reptilian fashion. He peered at me with great curiosity in his
puckered eyes.
  " 'You have less frontal development than I should have
expected,' said he at last. 'It is a dangerous habit to finger
loaded firearms in the pocket of one's dressing-gown.'
  "The fact is that upon his entrance I had instantly recognized
the extreme personal danger in which I lay. The only conceiv-
able escape for him lay in silencing my tongue. In an instant I
had slipped the revolver from the drawer into my pocket and was
covering him through the cloth. At his remark I drew the weapon
out and laid it cocked upon the table. He still smiled and
blinked, but there was something about his eyes which made me
feel very glad that I had it there.
  " 'You evidently don't know me,' said he.
  " 'On the contrary,' I answered, 'I think it is fairly evident
that I do. Pray take a chair. I can spare you five minutes if you
have anything to say.'
  " 'All that I have to say has already crossed your mind,' said
he.
  " 'Then possibly my answer has crossed yours,' I replied.
  " 'You stand fast?'
  " 'Absolutely. '
  "He clapped his hand into his pocket, and I raised the pistol
from the table. But he merely drew out a memorandum-book in
which he had scribbled some dates.
  " 'You crossed my path on the fourth of January,' said he.
'On the twenty-third you incommoded me; by the middle of
February I was seriously inconvenienced by you; at the end of
March I was absolutely hampered in my plans; and now, at the
close of April, I find myself placed in such a position through
your continual persecution that I am in positive danger of losing
my liberty. The situation is becoming an impossible one.'
  " 'Have you any suggestion to make?' I asked.
  " 'You must drop it, Mr. Holmes,' said he, swaying his face
about. 'You really must, you know.'
  " 'After Monday,' said I.
  " 'Tut, tut!' said he. 'I am quite sure that a man of your
intelligence will see that there can be but one outcome to this
affair. It is necessary that you should withdraw. You have
worked things in such a fashion that we have only one resource
left. It has been an intellectual treat to me to see the way in
which you have grappled with this affair, and I say, unaffect-
edly, that it would be a grief to me to be forced to take any
extreme measure. You smile, sir, but I assure you that it really
would.
  " 'Danger is part of my trade,' I remarked.
  " 'This is not danger,' said he. 'It is inevitable destruction.
You stand in the way not merely of an individual but of a mighty
organization, the full extent of which you, with all your clever-
ness, have been unable to realize. You must stand clear, Mr.
Holmes, or be trodden under foot.'
  " 'I am afraid,' said I, rising, 'that in the pleasure of this
conversation I am neglecting business of importance which awaits
me elsewhere.'
  "He rose also and looked at me in silence, shaking his head
sadly.
  " 'Well, well,' said he at last. 'It seems a pity, but I have
done what I could. I know every move of your game. You can
do nothing before Monday. It has been a duel between you and
me, Mr. Holmes. You hope to place me in the dock. I tell you
that I will never stand in the dock. You hope to beat me. I tell
you that you will never beat me. If you are clever enough to
bring destruction upon me, rest assured that I shall do as much to
you.'
  " 'You have paid me several compliments, Mr. Moriarty,'
said I. 'Let me pay you one in return when I say that if I were
assured of the former eventuality I would, in the interests of the
public, cheerfully accept the latter.'
  " 'I can promise you the one, but not the other,' he snarled,
and so turned his rounded back upon me and went peering and
blinking out of the room.
  "That was my singular intervie with Professor Moriarty. I
confess that it left an unpleasant effect upon my mind. His soft,
precise fashion of speech leaves a conviction of sincerity which a
mere bully could not produce. Of course, you will say: 'Why not
take police precautions against him?' The reason is that I am
well convinced that it is from his agents the blow would fall. I
have the best of proofs that it would be so."
  "You have already been assaulted?"
  "My dear Watson, Professor Moriarty is not a man who lets
the grass grow under his feet. I went out about midday to
transact some business in Oxford Street. As I passed the corner
which leads from Bentinck Street on to the Welbeck Street
crossing a two-horse van furiously driven whizzed round and
was on me like a flash. I sprang for the foot-path and saved
myself by the fraction of a second. The van dashed round by
Marylebone Lane and was gone in an instant. I kept to the
pavement after that, Watson, but as I walked down Vere Street a
brick came down from the roof of one of the houses and was
shattered to fragments at my feet. I called the police and had the
place examined. There were slates and bricks piled up on the
roof preparatory to some repairs, and they would have me be-
lieve that the wind had toppled over one of these. Of course I
knew better, but I could prove nothing. I took a cab after that
and reached my brother's rooms in Pall Mall, where I spent the
day. Now I have come round to you, and on my way I was
attacked by a rough with a bludgeon. I knocked him down, and
the police have him in custody; but I can tell you with the most
absolute confidence that no possible connection will ever be
traced between the gentleman upon whose front teeth I have
barked my knuckles and the retiring mathematical coach, who is,
I daresay, working out problems upon a black-board ten miles
away. You will not wonder, Watson, that my first act on enter-
ing your rooms was to close your shutters, and that I have been
compelled to ask your permission to leave the house by some
less conspicuous exit than the front door."
  I had often admired my friend's courage, but never more than
now, as he sat quietly checking off a series of incidents which
must have combined to make up a day of horror.
  "You will spend the night here?" I said.
  "No, my friend, you might find me a dangerous guest. I have
my plans laid, and all will be well. Matters have gone so far now
that they can move without my help as far as the arrest goes,
though my presence is necessary for a conviction. It is obvious,
therefore, that I cannot do better than get away for the few days
which remain before the police are at liberty to act. It would be a
great pleasure to me, therefore, if you could come on to the
Continent with me."
  "The practice is quiet," said I, "and I have an accommodat-
ing neighbour. I should be glad to come."
  "And to start to-morrow morning?"
  "If necessary."
  "Oh, yes, it is most necessary. Then these are your instruc-
tions, and I beg, my dear Watson, that you will obey them to the
letter, for you are now playing a double-handed game with me
against the cleverest rogue and the most powerful syndicate of
criminals in Europe. Now listen! You will dispatch whatever
luggage you intend to take by a trusty messenger unaddressed to
Victoria to-night. In the morning you will send for a hansom,
desiring your man to take neither the first nor the second which
may present itself. Into this hansom you will jump, and you will
drive to the Strand end of the Lowther Arcade, handing the
address to the cabman upon a slip of paper, with a request that
he will not throw it away. Have your fare ready, and the instant
that your cab stops, dash through the Arcade, timing yourself to
reach the other side at a quarter-past nine. You will find a small
brougham waiting close to the curb, driven by a fellow with a
heavy black cloak tipped at the collar with red. Into this you will
step, and you will reach Victoria in time for the Continental
express."
  "Where shall I meet you?"
  "At the station. The second first-class carriage from the front
will be reserved for us."
  "The carriage is our rendezvous, then?"
  "Yes."
  It was in vain that I asked Holmes to remain for the evening.
It was evident to me that he thought he might bring trouble to the
roof he was under, and that that was the motive which impelled
him to go. With a few hurried words as to our plans for the
morrow he rose and came out with me into the garden, clamber-
ing over the wall which leads into Mortimer Street, and immedi-
ately whistling for a hansom, in which I heard him drive away.
  In the morning I obeyed Holmes's injunctions to the letter. A
hansom was procured with such precautions as would prevent its
being one which was placed ready for us, and I drove immedi-
ately after breakfast to the Lowther Arcade, through which I
hurried at the top of my speed. A brougham was waiting with a
very massive driver wrapped in a dark cloak, who, the instant
that I had stepped in, whipped up the horse and rattled off to
Victoria Station. On my alighting there he turned the camage,
and dashed away again without so much as a look in my direction.
  So far all had gone admirably. My luggage was waiting for
me, and I had no difficulty in finding the carriage which Holmes
had indicated, the less so as it was the only one in the train
which was marked "Engaged." My only source of anxiety now
was the non-appearance of Holmes. The station clock marked
only seven minutes from the time when we were due to start. In
vain I searched among the groups of travellers and leave-takers
for the lithe figure of my friend. There was no sign of him. I
spent a few minutes in assisting a venerable Italian priest, who
was endeavouring to make a porter understand, in his broken
English, that his luggage was to be booked through to Paris.
Then, having taken another look round, I returned to my car-
riage, where I found that the porter, in spite of the ticket, had
given me my decrepit Italian friend as a travelling companion. It
was useless for me to explain to him that his presence was an
intrusion, for my Italian was even more limited than his English,
so I shrugged my shoulders resignedly, and continued to look out
anxiously for my friend. A chill of fear had come over me, as I
thought that his absence might mean that some blow had fallen
during the night. Already the doors had all been shut and the
whistle blown, when --
  "My dear Watson," said a voice, "you have not even conde-
scended to say good-morning."
  I turned in uncontrollable astonishment. The aged ecclesiastic
had turned his face towards me. For an instant the wrinkles were
smoothed away, the nose drew away from the chin, the lower lip
ceased to protrude and the mouth to mumble, the dull eyes
regained their fire, the drooping figure expanded. The next the
whole frame collapsed again, and Holmes had gone as quickly as
he had come.
  "Good heavens!" I cried, "how you startled me!"
  "Every precaution is still necessary," he whispered. "I have
reason to think that they are hot upon our trail. Ah, there is
Moriarty himself."
  The train had already begun to move as Holmes spoke. Glanc-
ing back, I saw a tall man pushing his way furiously through the
crowd, and waving his hand as if he desired to have the train
stopped. It was too late, however, for we were rapidly gathering
momentum, and an instant later had shot clear of the station.
  "With all our precautions, you see that we have cut it rather
fine," said Holmes, laughing. He rose, and throwing off the
black cassock and hat which had formed his disguise, he packed
them away in a hand-bag.
  "Have you seen the morning paper, Watson?"
  "No."
  "You haven't seen about Baker Street, then?"
  "Baker Street?"
  "They set fire to our rooms last night. No great harm was
done."
  "Good heavens, Holmes. this is intolerable!"
  "They must have lost my track completely after their
bludgeonman was arrested. Otherwise they could not have imag-
ined that I had returned to my rooms. They have evidently taken
the precaution of watching you, however, and that is what has
brought Moriarty to Victoria. You could not have made any slip
in coming?"
  "I did exactly what you advised."
  "Did you find your brougham?"
  "Yes, it was waiting."
  "Did you recognize your coachman?"
  "No."
  "It was my brother Mycroft. It is an advantage to get about in
such a case without taking a mercenary into your confidence.
But we must plan what we are to do about Moriarty now."
  "As this is an express, and as the boat runs in connection with
it, I should think we have shaken him off very effectively."
  "My dear Watson, you evidently did not realize my meaning
when I said that this man may be taken as being quite on the
same intellectual plane as myself. You do not imagine that if I
were the pursuer I should allow myself to be baffled by so slight
an obstacle. Why, then, should you think so meanly of him?"
  "What will he do?"
  "What I should do."
  "What would you do, then?"
  "Engage a special."
  "But it must be late."
  "By no means. This train stops at Canterbury; and there is
always at least a quarter of an hour's delay at the boat. He will
catch us there."
  "One would think that we were the criminals. Let us have him
arrested on his arrival."
  "It would be to ruin the work of three months. We should get
the big fish. but the smaller would dart right and left out of the
net. On Monday we should have them all. No, an arrest is
inadmissible."
  "What then?"
  "We shall get out at Canterbury."
  "And then?"
  "Well, then we must make a cross-country journey to
Newhaven, and so over to Dieppe. Moriarty will again do what I
should do. He will get on to Paris, mark down our luggage, and
wait for two days at the depot. In the meantime we shall treat
ourselves to a couple of carpet-bags, encourage the manufactures
of the countries through which we travel, and make our way at
our leisure into Switzerland, via Luxembourg and Basle."
  At Canterbury, therefore, we alighted, only to find that we
should have to walt an hour before we could get a train to
Newhaven.
  I was still looking rather ruefully after the rapidly disappearing
luggage-van which contained my wardrobe, when Holmes pulled
my sleeve and pointed up the line.
  "Already, you see," said he.
  Far away, from among the Kentish woods there rose a thin
spray of smoke. A minute later a carriage and engine could be
seen flying along the open curve which leads to the station. We
had hardly time to take our place behind a pile of luggage when
it passed with a rattle and a roar, beating a blast of hot air into
our faces.
  "There he goes," said Holmes, as we watched the carriage
swing and rock over the points. "There are limits, you see, to
our friend's intelligetnce. It would have been a coup-de-maitre
had he deduced what I would deduce and acted accordingly."
  "And what would he have done had he overtaken us?"
  "There cannot be the least doubt that he would have made a
murderous attack upon me. It is, however, a game at which two
may play. The question now is whether we should take a prema-
ture lunch here, or run our chance of starving before we reach
the buffet at Newhaven."
  We made our way to Brussels that night and spent two days
there, moving on upon the third day as far as Strasbourg. On the
Monday morning Holmes had telegraphed to the London police,
and in the evening we found a reply waiting for us at our hotel.
Holmes tore it open, and then with a bitter curse hurled it into
the grate.
  "I might have known it!" he groaned. "He has escaped!"
  "Moriarty?"
  "They have secured the whole gang with the exception of
him. He has given them the slip. Of course, when I had left the
country there was no one to cope with him. But I did think that I
had put the game in their hands. I think that you had better return
to England, Watson."
  "Why?"
  "Because you will find me a dangerous companion now. This
man's occupation is gone. He is lost if he returns to London. If I
read his character right he will devote his whole energies to
revenging himself upon me. He said as much in our short
interview, and I fancy that he meant it. I should certainly recom-
mend you to return to your practice."
  It was hardly an appeal to be successful with one who was an
old campaigner as well as an old friend. We sat in the Strasbourg
salle-a-manger arguing the question for half an hour, but the
same night we had resumed our journey and were well on our
way to Geneva.
  For a charming week we wandered up the valley of the Rhone,
and then, branching off at Leuk, we made our way over the
Gemmi Pass, still deep in snow, and so, by way of Interlaken, to
Meiringen. It was a lovely trip, the dainty green of the spring
below, the virgin white of the winter above; but it was clear to
me that never for one instant did Holmes forget the shadow
which lay across him. In the homely Alpine villages or in the
lonely mountain passes, I could still tell by his quick glancing
eyes and his sharp scrutiny of every face that passed us, that he
was well convinced that, walk where we would, we could not
walk ourselves clear of the danger which was dogging our
footsteps
  Once, i remember, as we passed over the Gemmi, and walked
along the border of the melancholy Daubensee, a large rock
which had been dislodged from the ridge upon our right clattered
down and roared into the lake behind us. In an instant Holmes
had raced up on to the ridge, and, standing upon a lofty pinna-
cle, craned his neck in every direction. It was in vain that our
guide assured him that a fall of stones was a common chance in
the springtime at that spot. He said nothing, but he smiled at me
with the air of a man who sees the fulfilment of that which he
had expected.
  And yet for all his watchfulness he was never depressed. On
the contrary, I can never recollect having seen him in such
exuberant spirits. Again and again he recurred to the fact that if
he could be assured that society was freed from Professor Moriarty
he would cheerfully bring his own career to a conclusion.
  "I think that I may go so far as to say, Watson, that I have not
lived wholly in vain," he remarked. "If my record were closed
to-night I could still survey it with equanimity. The air of
London is the sweeter for my presence. In over a thousand cases
I am not aware that I have ever used my powers upon the wrong
side. Of late I have been tempted to look into the problems
furnished by nature rather than those more superficial ones tor
which our artificial state of society is responsible. Your memoirs
will draw to an end, Watson, upon the day that I crown my
career by the capture or extinction of the most dangerous and
capable criminal in Europe."
  I shall be brief, and yet exact, in the little which remains for
me to tell. It is not a subject on which I would willingly dwell,
and yet I am conscious that a duty devolves upon me to omit no
detail.
  It was on the third of May that we reached the little village of
Meiringen, where we put up at the Englischer Hof. then kept by
Peter Steiler the elder. Our landlord was an intelligent man and
spoke excellent English, having served for three years as waiter
at the Grosvenor Hotel in London. At his advice, on the after-
noon of the fourth we set off together, with the intention of
crossing the hills and spending the night at the hamlet of Rosenlaui.
We had strict injunctions, however, on no account to pass the
falls of Reichenbach, which are about halfway up the hills,
without making a small detour to see them.
  It is, indeed, a fearful place. The torrent, swollen by the
melting snow, plunges into a tremendous abyss, from which the
spray rolls up like the smoke from a burning house. The shaft
into which the river hurls itself is an immense chasm, lined by
glistening coal-black rock, and narrowing into a creaming, boil-
ing pit of incalculable depth, which brims over and shoots the
stream onward over its jagged lip. The long sweep of green
water roaring forever down, and the thick flickering curtain of
spray hissing forever upward, turn a man giddy with their con-
stant whirl and clamour. We stood near the edge peering down at
the gleam of the breaking water far below us against the black
rocks, and listening to the half-human shout which came boom-
ing up with the spray out of the abyss.
  The path has been cut halfway round the fall to afford a
complete view, but it ends abruptly, and the traveller has to
return as he came. We had turned to do so, when we saw a
Swiss lad come running along it with a letter in his hand. It bore
the mark of the hotel which we had just left and was addressed to
me by the landlord. It appeared that within a very few minutes of
our leaving, an English lady had arrived who was in the last
stage of consumption. She had wintered at Davos Platz and was
journeying now to join her friends at Lucerne, when a sudden
hemorrhage had overtaken her. It was thought that she could
hardly live a few hours, but it would be a great consolation to
her to see an English doctor, and, if I would only return, etc.
The good Steiler assured me in a postscript that he would himself
look upon my compliance as a very great favour, since the lady
absolutely refused to see a Swiss physician, and he could not but
feel that he was incurring a great responsibility.
  The appeal was one which could not be ignored. It was
impossible to refuse the request of a fellow-countrywoman dying
in a strange land. Yet I had my scruples about leaving Holmes. It
was finally agreed, however, that he should retain the young
Swiss messenger with him as guide and companion while I
returned to Meiringen. My friend would stay some little time at
the fall, he said, and would then walk slowly over the hill to
Rosenlaui, where I was to rejoin him in the evening. As I turned
away I saw Holmes, with his back against a rock and his arms
folded, gazing down at the rush of the waters. It was the last that
I was ever destined to see of him in this world.
  When I was near the bottom of the descent I looked back. It
was impossible, from that position, to see the fall, but I could
see the curving path which winds over the shoulder of the hills
and leads to it. Along this a man was, I remember, walking very
rapidly.
  I could see his black figure clearly outlined against the green
behind him. I noted him, and the energy with which he walked,
but he passed from my mind again as I hurried on upon my
errand.
  It may have been a little over an hour before I reached
Meiringen. Old Steiler was standing at the porch of his hotel.
  "Well," said I, as I came hurrying up, "I trust that she is no
worse?"
  A look of surprise passed over his face, and at the first quiver
of his eyebrows my heart turned to lead in my breast.
  "You did not write this?" I said, pulling the letter from my
pocket. "There is no sick Englishwoman in the hotel?"
  "Certainly not!" he cried. "But it has the hotel mark upon it!
Ha, it must have been written by that tall Englishman who came
in after you had gone. He said --"
  But I waited for none of the landlord's explanation. In a tingle
of fear I was already running down the village street, and making
for the path which I had so lately descended. It had taken me an
hour to come down. For all my efforts two more had passed
betore I found myself at the fall of Reichenbach once more.
There was Holmes's Alpine-stock still leaning against the rock
by which I had left him. But there was no sign of him, and it
was in vain that I shouted. My only answer was my own voice
reverberating in a rolling echo from the cliffs around me.
  It was the sight of that Alpine-stock which turned me cold and
sick. He had not gone to Rosenlaui, then. He had remained on
that three-foot path, with sheer wall on one side and sheer drop
on the other, until his enemy had overtaken him. The young
Swiss had gone too. He had probably been in the pay of Moriarty
and had left the two men together. And then what had happened?
Who was to tell us what had happened then?
  I stood for a minute or two to collect myself, for I was dazed
with the horror of the thing. Then I began to think of Holmes's
own methods and to try to practise them in reading this tragedy.
It was, alas, only too easy to do. During our conversation we
had not gone to the end of the path, and the Alpine-stock marked
the place where we had stood. The blackish soil is kept forever
soft by the incessant drift of spray, and a bird would leave its
tread upon it. Two lines of footmarks were clearly marked along
the farther end of the path, both leading away from me. There
were none returning. A few yards from the end the soil was all
ploughed up into a patch of mud, and the brambles and ferns
which fringed the chasm were torn and bedraggled. I lay upon
my face and peered over with the spray spouting up all around
me. It had darkened since I left, and now I could only see here
and there the glistening of moisture upon the black walls, and far
away down at the end of the shaft the gleam of the broken water.
I shouted; but only that same half-human cry of the fall was
borne back to my ears.
  But it was destined that I should, after all, have a last word of
greeting from my friend and comrade. I have said that his
Alpine-stock had been left leaning against a rock which jutted on
to the path. From the top of this bowlder the gleam of something
bright caught my eye, and raising my hand I found that it came
from the silver cigarette-case which he used to carry. As I took it
up a small square of paper upon which it had lain fluttered down
on to the ground. Unfolding it, I found that it consisted of three
pages torn from his notebook and addressed to me. It was
characteristic of the man that the direction was as precise. and
the writing as firm and clear, as though it had been written in his
study.

     MY DEAR WATSON [it said]:
       I write these few lines through the courtesy of Mr.
     Moriarty, who awaits my convenience for the final discus-
     sion of those questions which lie between us. He has been
     giving me a sketch of the methods by which he avoided the
     English police and kept himself informed of our move-
     ments. They certainly confirm the very high opinion which
     I had formed of his abilities. I am pleased to think that I
     shall be able to free society from any further effects of his
     presence, though I fear that it is at a cost which will give
     pain to my friends, and especially, my dear Watson, to you.
     I have already explained to you, however, that my career
     had in any case reached its crisis, and that no possible
     conclusion to it could be more congenial to me than this.
     Indeed, if I may make a full confession to you, I was quite
     convinced that the letter from Meiringen was a hoax, and I
     allowed you to depart on that errand under the persuasion
     that some development of this sort would follow. Tell In-
     spector Patterson that the papers which he needs to convict
     the gang are in pigeonhole M., done up in a blue envelope
     and inscribed "Moriarty." I made every disposition of my
     property before leaving England and handed it to my brother
     Mycroft. Pray give my greetings to Mrs. Watson, and
     believe me to be, my dear fellow
                                           Very sincerely yours,
                                                SHERLOCK HOLMES.

  A few words may suffice to tell the little that remains. An
examination by experts leaves little doubt that a personal contest
between the two men ended, as it could hardly fail to end in such
a situation, in their reeling over, locked in each other's arms.
Any attempt at recovering the bodies was absolutely hopeless,
and there, deep down in that dreadful cauldron of swirling water
and seething foam, will lie for all time the most dangerous
criminal and the foremost champion of the law of their genera-
tion. The Swiss youth was never found again, and there can be
no doubt that he was one of the numerous agents whom Moriarty
kept in his employ. As to the gang, it will be within the memory
of the public how completely the evidence which Holmes had
accumulated exposed their organization, and how heavily the
hand of the dead man weighed upon them. Of their terrible chief
few details came out during the proceedings, and if I have now
been compelled to make a clear statement of his career, it is due
to those injudicious champions who have endeavoured to clear
his memory by attacks upon him whom I shall ever regard as the
best and the wisest man whom I have ever known.

===============================
                The Five Orange Pips

  When I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock
Holmes cases between the years '82 and '90, I am faced by so
many which present strange and interesting features that it is no
easy matter to know which to choose and which to leave. Some,
however, have already gained publicity through the papers, and
others have not offered a field for those peculiar qualities which
my friend possessed in so high a degree, and which it is the
object of these papers to illustrate. Some, too, have baffled his
analytical skill, and would be, as narratives, beginnings without
an ending, while others have been but partially cleared up, and
have their explanations founded rather upon conjecture and sur-
mise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear to
him. There is, however, one of these last which was so remark-
able in its details and so startling in its results that I am tempted
to give some account of it in spite of the fact that there are points
in connection with it which never have been, and probably never
will be, entirely cleared up.
  The year '87 furnished us with a long series of cases of
greater or less interest, of which I retain the records. Among my
headings under this one twelve months I find an account of the
adventure of the Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant
Society, who held a luxurious club in the lower vault of a
furniture warehouse, of the facts connected with the loss of the
British bark Sophy Anderson, of the singular adventures of the
Grice Patersons in the island of Uffa, and finally of the Camberwell
poisoning case. In the latter, as may be remembered, Sherlock
Holmes was able, by winding up the dead man's watch, to prove
that it had been wound up two hours before, and that therefore
the deceased had gone to bed within that time -- a deduction
which was of the greatest importance in clearing up the case. All
these I may sketch out at some future date, but none of them
present such singular features as the strange train of circum-
stances which I have now taken up my pen to describe.
  It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial
gales had set in with exceptional violence. All day the wind had
screamed and the rain had beaten against the windows, so that
even here in the heart of great, hand-made London we were
forced to raise our minds for the instant from the routine of life
and to recognize the presence of those great elemental forces
which shriek at mankind through the bars of his civilization, like
untamed beasts in a cage. As evening drew in, the storm grew
higher and louder, and the wind cried and sobbed like a child in
the chimney. Sherlock Holmes sat moodily at one side of the
fireplace cross-indexing his records of crime, while I at the other
was deep in one of Clark Russell's fine sea-stories until the howl
of the gale from without seemed to blend with the text, and the
splash of the rain to lengthen out into the long swash of the sea
waves. My wife was on a visit to her mother's, and for a few
days I was a dweller once more in my old quarters at Baker
Street.
  "Why," said I, glancing up at my companion, "that was
surely the bell. Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours,
perhaps?"
  "Except yourself I have none," he answered. "I do not
encourage visitors."
  "A client, then?"
  "If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man
out on such a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is
more likely to be some crony of the landlady's."
  Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for
there came a step in the passage and a tapping at the door. He
stretched out his long arm to turn the lamp away from himself
and towards the vacant chair upon which a newcomer must sit.
  "Come in!" said he.
  The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the
outside, well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of refine-
ment and delicacy in his bearing. The streaming umbrella which
he held in his hand, and his long shining waterproof told of the
fierce weather through which he had come. He looked about him
anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I could see that his face
was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of a man who is weighed
down with some great anxiety.
  "l owe you an apology," he said, raising his golden pince-nez
to his eyes. "I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have
brought some traces of the storm and rain into your snug chamber."
  "Give me your coat and umbrella," said Holmes. "They may
rest here on the hook and will be dry presently. You have come
up from the south-west, I see."
  "Yes, from Horsham."
  "That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps
is quite distinctive."
  "I have come for advice."
  "That is easily got."
  "And help."
  "That is not always so easy."
  "I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major
Prendergast how you saved him in the Tankerville Club scandal."
  "Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at
cards."
  "He said that you could solve anything."
  "He said too much."
  "That you are never beaten."
  "I have been beaten four times  -  three times by men, and
once by a woman."
  "But what is that compared with the number of your successes?"
  "It is true that I have been generally successful."
  "Then you may be so with me."
  "I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and favour
me with some details as to your case."
  "It is no ordinary one."
  "None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of
appeal."
  "And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you
have ever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of
events than those which have happened in my own family."
  "You fill me with interest," said Holmes. "Pray give us the
essential facts from the commencement, and I can afterwards
question you as to those details which seem to me to be most
important."
  The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out
towards the blaze.
  "My name," said he, "is John Openshaw, but my own affairs
have, as far as I can understand, little to do with this awful
business. It is a hereditary matter; so in order to give you an idea
of the facts, I must go back to the commencement of the affair.
  "You must know that my grandfather had two sons -- my
uncle Elias and my father Joseph. My father had a small factory
at Coventry, which he enlarged at the time of the invention of
bicycling. He was a patentee of the Openshaw unbreakable tire,
and his business met with such success that he was able to sell it
and to retire upon a handsome competence.
  "My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young
man and became a planter in Florida, where he was reported to
have done very well. At the time of the war he fought in
Jackson's army, and afterwards under Hood, where he rose to be
a colonel. When Lee laid down his arms my uncle returned to his
plantation, where he remained for three or four years. About
1869 or 1870 he came back to Europe and took a small estate in
Sussex, near Horsham. He had made a very considerable fortune
in the States, and his reason for leaving them was his aversion to
the negroes, and his dislike of the Republican policy in extend-
ing the franchise to them. He was a singular man, fierce and
quick-tempered, very foul-mouthed when he was angry, and of a
most retiring disposition. During all the years that he lived at
Horsham, I doubt if ever he set foot in the town. He had a
garden and two or three fields round his house, and there he
would take his exercise, though very often for weeks on end he
would never leave his room. He drank a great deal of brandy and
smoked very heavily, but he would see no society and did not
want any friends, not even his own brother.
  "He didn't mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at the
time when he saw me first I was a youngster of twelve or so.
This would be in the year 1878, after he had been eight or nine
years in England. He begged my father to let me live with him
and he was very kind to me in his way. When he was sober he
used to be fond of playing backgammon and draughts with me,
and he would make me his representative both with the servants
and with the tradespeople, so that by the time that I was sixteen I
was quite master of the house. I kept all the keys and could go
where I liked and do what I liked, so long as I did not disturb
him in his privacy. There was one singular exception, however,
for he had a single room, a lumber-room up among the attics,
which was invariably locked, and which he would never permit
either me or anyone else to enter. With a boy's curiosity I have
peeped through the keyhole, but I was never able to see more
than such a collection of old trunks and bundles as would be
expected in such a room.
  "One day -- it was in March, 1883 -- a letter with a foreign
stamp lay upon the table in front of the colonel's plate. It was
not a common thing for him to receive letters, for his bills were
all paid in ready money, and he had no friends of any sort. 'From
India!' said he as he took it up, 'Pondicherry postmark! What
can this be?' Opening it hurriedly, out there jumped five little
dried orange pips, which pattered down upon his plate. I began
to laugh at this, but the laugh was struck from my lips at the
sight of his face. His lip had fallen, his eyes were protruding, his
skin the colour of putty, and he glared at the envelope which he
still held in his trembling hand, 'K. K. K.!' he shrieked, and
then, 'My God, my God, my sins have overtaken me!'
  " 'What is it, uncle?' I cried.
  " 'Death,' said he, and rising from the table he retired to his
room, leaving me palpitating with horror. I took up the envelope
and saw scrawled in red ink upon the inner flap, just above the
gum, the letter K three times repeated. There was nothing else
save the five dried pips. What could be the reason of his over-
powering terror? I left the breakfast-table, and as I ascended the
stair I met him coming down with an old rusty key, which must
have belonged to the attic, in one hand, and a small brass box,
like a cashbox, in the other.
  " 'They may do what they like, but I'll checkmate them still,'
said he with an oath. 'Tell Mary that I shall want a fire in my
room to-day, and send down to Fordham, the Horsham lawyer.'
  "I did as he ordered, and when the lawyer arrived I was asked
to step up to the room. The fire was burning brightly, and in the
grate there was a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burned paper,
while the brass box stood open and empty beside it. As I glanced
at the box I noticed, with a start, that upon the lid was printed
the treble K which I had read in the morning upon the envelope.
  " 'I wish you, John,' said my uncle, 'to witness my will. I
leave my estate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages,
to my brother, your father, whence it will, no doubt, descend to
you. If you can enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find you
cannot, take my advice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliest
enemy. I am sorry to give you such a two-edged thing, but I
can't say what turn things are going to take. Kindly sign the
paper where Mr. Fordham shows you.'
  "I signed the paper as directed, and the lawyer took it away
with him. The singular incident made, as you may think, the
deepest impression upon me, and I pondered over it and turned it
every way in my mind without being able to make anything of it.
Yet I could not shake off the vague feeling of dread which it left
behind, though the sensation grew less keen as the weeks passed
and nothing happened to disturb the usual routine of our lives. I
could see a change in my uncle, however. He drank more than
ever, and he was less inclined for any sort of society. Most of his
time he would spend in his room, with the door locked upon the
inside, but sometimes he would emerge in a sort of drunken
frenzy and would burst out of the house and tear about the
garden with a revolver in his hand, screaming out that he was
afraid of no man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like a
sheep in a pen, by man or devil. When these hot fits were over
however, he would rush tumultuously in at the door and lock and
bar it behind him, like a man who can brazen it out no longer
against the terror which lies at the roots of his soul. At such
times I have seen his face, even on a cold day, glisten with
moisture, as though it were new raised from a basin.
  "Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not
to abuse your patience, there came a night when he made one of
those drunken sallies from which he never came back. We found
him, when we went to search for him, face downward in a little
green-scummed pool, which lay at the foot of the garden. There
was no sign of any violence, and the water was but two feet
deep, so that the jury, having regard to his known eccentricity,
brought in a verdict of 'suicide.' But I, who knew how he
winced from the very thought of death, had much ado to persuade
myself that he had gone out of his way to meet it. The matter
passed, however, and my father entered into possession of the
estate, and of some 14,000 pounds, which lay to his credit at the
bank."
  "One moment," Holmes interposed, "your statement is, I
foresee, one of the most remarkable to which I have ever lis-
tened. Let me have the date of the reception by your uncle of the
letter, and the date of his supposed suicide."
  "The letter arrived on March 10, 1883. His death was seven
weeks later, upon the night of May 2d."
  "Thank you. Pray proceed."
  "When my father took over the Horsham property, he, at my
request, made a careful examination of the attic, which had been
always locked up. We found the brass box there, although its
contents had been destroyed. On the inside of the cover was a
paper label, with the initials of K. K. K. repeated upon it, and
'Letters, memoranda, receipts, and a register' written beneath.
These, we presume, indicated the nature of the papers which had
been destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. For the rest, there was
nothing of much importance in the attic save a great many
scattered papers and note-books bearing upon my uncle's life in
America. Some of them were of the war time and showed that he
had done his duty well and had borne the repute of a brave
soldier. Others were of a date during the reconstruction of the
Southern states, and were mostly concerned with politics, for he
had evidently taken a strong part in opposing the carpet-bag
politicians who had been sent down from the North.
  "Well, it was the beginning of '84 when my father came to
live at Horsham, and all went as well as possible with us until
the January of '85. On the fourth day after the new year I heard
my father give a sharp cry of surprise as we sat together at the
breakfast-table. There he was, sitting with a newly opened enve-
lope in one hand and five dried orange pips in the outstretched
palm of the other one. He had always laughed at what he called
my cock-and-bull story about the colonel, but he looked very
scared and puzzled now that the same thing had come upon
himself.
  " 'Why, what on earth does this mean, John?' he stammered.
  "My heart had turned to lead. 'It is K. K. K.,' said I.
  "He looked inside the envelope. 'So it is,' he cried. 'Here are
the very letters. But what is this written above them?'
  " 'Put the papers on the sundial,' I read, peeping over his
shoulder.
  " 'What papers? What sundial?' he asked.
  " 'The sundial in the garden. There is no other,' said I; 'but
the papers must be those that are destroyed.'
  " 'Pooh!' said he, gripping hard at his courage. 'We are in a
civilized land here, and we can't have tomfoolery of this kind.
Where does the thing come from?'
  " 'From Dundee,' I answered, glancing at the postmark.
  " 'Some preposterous practical joke,' said he. 'What have I to
do with sundials and papers? I shall take no notice of such
nonsense.'
  " 'I should certainly speak to the police,' I said.
  " 'And be laughed at for my pains. Nothing of the sort.'
  " 'Then let me do so?'
  " 'No, I forbid you. I won't have a fuss made about such
nonsense.'
  "It was in vain to argue with him, for he was a very obstinate
man. I went about, however, with a heart which was full of
forebodings.
  "On the third day after the coming of the letter my father went
from home to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who is
in command of one of the forts upon Portsdown Hill. I was glad
that he should go, for it seemed to me that he was farther from
danger when he was away from home. In that, however, I was in
error. Upon the second day of his absence I received a telegram
from the major, imploring me to come at once. My father had
fallen over one of the deep chalk-pits which abound in the
neighbourhood, and was lying senseless, with a shattered skull. I
hurried to him, but he passed away without having ever recov-
ered his consciousness. He had, as it appears, been returning
from Fareham in the twilight, and as the country was unknown
to him, and the chalk-pit unfenced, the jury had no hesitation in
bringing in a verdict of 'death from accidental causes.' Carefully
as I examined every fact connected with his death, I was unable
to find anything which could suggest the idea of murder. There
were no signs of violence, no footmarks, no robbery, no record
of strangers having been seen upon the roads. And yet I need not
tell you that my mind was far from at ease, and that I was
well-nigh certain that some foul plot had been woven round him.
  "In this sinister way I came into my inheritance. You will ask
me why I did not dispose of it? I answer, because I was well
convinced that our troubles were in some way dependent upon an
incident in my uncle's life, and that the danger would be as
pressing in one house as in another.
  "It was in January, '85, that my poor father met his end, and
two years and eight months have elapsed since then. During that
time I have lived happily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope
that this curse had passed way from the family, and that it had
ended with the last generation. I had begun to take comfort too
soon, however; yesterday morning the blow fell in the very
shape in which it had come upon my father."
  The young man took from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope,
and turning to the table he shook out upon it five little dried
orange pips.
  "This is the envelope," he continued. "The postmark is
London -- eastern division. Within are the very words which
were upon my father's last message: 'K. K. K.'; and then 'Put
the papers on the sundial.' "
  "What have you done?'' asked Holmes.
  "Nothing."
  "Nothing?"
  "To tell the truth" -- he sank his face into his thin, white
hands -- "I have felt helpless. I have felt like one of those poor
rabbits when the snake is writhing towards it. I seem to be in the
grasp of some resistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight and
no precautions can guard against."
  "Tut! tut!" cried Sherlock Holmes. "You must act, man, or
you are lost. Nothing but energy can save you. This is no time
for despair."
  "I have seen the police."
  "Ah!"
  "But they listened to my story with a smile. I am convinced
that the inspector has formed the opinion that the letters are all
practical jokes, and that the deaths of my relations were really
accidents, as the jury stated, and were not to be connected with
the warnings."
  Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air. "Incredible
imbecility!" he cried.
  "They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may re-
main in the house with me."
  "Has he come with you to-night?"
  "No. His orders were to stay in the house."
  Again Holmes raved in the air.
  "Why did you come to me," he cried, "and, above all, why
did you not come at once?"
  "I did not know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Major
Prendergast about my troubles and was advised by him to come
to you."
  "It is really two days since you had the letter. We should have
acted before this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than
that which you have placed before us -- no suggestive detail
which might help us?"
  "There is one thing," said John Openshaw. He rummaged in
his coat pocket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-
tinted paper, he laid it out upon the table. "I have some remem-
brance," said he, "that on the day when my uncle burned the
papers I observed that the small, unburned margins which lay
amid the ashes were of this particular colour. I found this single
sheet upon the floor of his room, and I am inclined to think that
it may be one of the papers which has, perhaps, fluttered out
from among the others, and in that way has escaped destruction.
Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see that it helps us much. I
think myself that it is a page from some private diary. The
writing is undoubtedly my uncle's."
  Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of
paper, which showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been
torn from a book. It was headed, "March, 1869," and beneath
were the following enigmatical notices:

     4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.

     7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Paramore, and John Swain,
          of St. Augustine.
     9th. McCauley cleared.
     1Oth. John Swain cleared.
     12th. Visited Paramore. All well.

  "Thank you!" said Holmes, folding up the paper and return-
ing it to our visitor. "And now you must on no account lose
another instant. We cannot spare time even to discuss what you
have told me. You must get home instantly and act."
  "What shall I do?"
  "There is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You
must put this piece of paper which you have shown us into the
brass box which you have described. You must also put in a note
to say that all the other papers were burned by your uncle, and
that this is the only one which remains. You must assert that in
such words as will carry conviction with them. Having done
this, you must at once put the box out upon the sundial, as
directed. Do you understand?"
  "Entirely."
  "Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. I
think that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have
our web to weave, while theirs is already woven. The first
consideration is to remove the pressing danger which threatens
you. The second is to clear up the mystery and to punish the
guilty parties."
  "I thank you," said the young man, rising and pulling on his
overcoat. "You have given me fresh life and hope. I shall
certainly do as you advise."
  "Do not lose an instant. And, above all, take care of yourself
in the meanwhile, for I do not think that there can be a doubt that
you are threatened by a very real and imminent danger. How do
you go back?
  "By train from Waterloo."
  "It is not yet nine. The streets will be crowded, so l trust that
you may be in safety. And yet you cannot guard yourself too
closely."
  "I am armed."
  "That is well. To-morrow I shall set to work upon your case."
  "I shall see you at Horsham, then?"
  "No, your secret lies in London. It is there that I shall seek
it."
  "Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with
news as to the box and the papers. I shall take your advice in
every particular." He shook hands with us and took his leave.
Outside the wind still screamed and the rain splashed and pat-
tered against the windows. This strange, wild story seemed to
have come to us from amid the mad elements -- blown in upon us
like a sheet of sea-weed in a gale -- and now to have been
reabsorbed by them once more.
  Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with his head
sunk forward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire.
Then he lit his pipe, and leaning back in his chair he watched the
blue smoke-rings as they chased each other up to the ceiling.
  "I think, Watson," he remarked at last, "that of all our cases
we have had none more fantastic than this."
  "Save, perhaps, the Sign of Four."
  "Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw
seems to me to be walking amid even greater perils than did the
Sholtos."
  "But have you," I asked, "formed any definite conception as
to what these perils are?"
  "There can be no question as to their nature," he answered.
  "Then what are they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he
pursue this unhappy family?"
  Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon
the arms of his chair, with his finger-tips together. "The ideal
reasoner," he remarked, "would, when he had once been shown
a single fact in all its bearings, deduce from it not only all the
chain of events which led up to it but also all the results which
would follow from it. As Cuvier could correctly describe a
whole animal by the contemplation of a single bone, so the
observer who has thoroughly understood one link in a series of
incidents should be able to accurately state all the other ones,
both before and after. We have not yet grasped the results which
the reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solved in the
study which have baffled all those who have sought a solution by
the aid of their senses. To carry the art, however, to its highest
pitch, it is necessary that the reasoner should be able to utilize all
the facts which have come to his knowledge; and this in itself
implies, as you will readily see, a possession of all knowledge,
which, even in these days of free education and encyclopaedias,
is a somewhat rare accomplishment. It is not so impossible,
however, that a man should possess all knowledge which is
likely to be useful to him in his work, and this I have endeav-
oured in my case to do. If I remember rightly, you on one
occasion, in the early days of our friendship, defined my limits
in a very precise fashion."
  "Yes," I answered, laughing. "It was a singular document.
Philosophy, astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I
remember. Botany variable, geology profound as regards the
mud-stains from any region within fifty miles of town, chemistry
eccentric, anatomy unsystematic, sensational literature and crime
records unique, violin-player, boxer, swordsman, lawyer, and
self-poisoner by cocaine and tobacco. Those, I think, were the
main points of my analysis."
  Holmes grinned at the last item. "Well," he said, "I say
now, as I said then, that a man should keep his little brain-attic
stocked with all the furniture that he is likely to use, and the rest
he can put away in the lumber-room of his library, where he can
get it if he wants it. Now, for such a case as the one which has
been submitted to us to-night, we need certainly to muster all our
resources. Kindly hand me down the letter K of the American
Encyclopaedia which stands upon the shelf beside you. Thank
you. Now let us consider the situation and see what may be
deduced from it. In the first place, we may start with a strong
presumption that Colonel Openshaw had some very strong rea-
son for leaving America. Men at his time of life do not change
all their habits and exchange willingly the charming climate of
Florida for the lonely life of an English provincial town. His
extreme love of solitude in England suggests the idea that he was
in fear of someone or something, so we may assume as a
working hypothesis that it was fear of someone or something
which drove him from America. As to what it was he feared, we
can only deduce that by considering the formidable letters which
were received by himself and his successors. Did you remark the
postmarks of those letters?"
  "The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee,
and the third from London."
  "From East London. What do you deduce from that?"
  "They are all seaports. That the writer was on board of a
ship."
  "Excellent. We have already a clue. There can be no doubt
that the probability -- the strong probability -- is that the writer
was on board of a ship. And now let us consider another point.
In the case of Pondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between the
threat and its fulfillment, in Dundee it was only some three or
four days. Does that suggest anything?"
  "A greater distance to travel."
  "But the letter had also a greater distance to come."
  "Then I do not see the point."
  "There is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the
man or men are is a sailing-ship. It looks as if they always seni
their singular warning or token before them when starting upon
their mission. You see how quickly the deed followed the sign
when it came from Dundee. If they had come from Pondicherry
in a steamer they would have arrived almost as soon as their
letter. But, as a matter of fact, seven weeks elapsed. I think that
those seven weeks represented the difference between the mail-
boat which brought the letter and the sailing vessel which brought
the writer."
  "It is possible."
  "More than that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly
urgency of this new case, and why I urged young Openshaw to
caution. The blow has always fallen at the end of the time which
it would take the senders to travel the distance. But this one
comes from London, and therefore we cannot count upon delay."
  "Good God!" I cried. "What can it mean, this relentless
persecution?"
  "The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital
importance to the person or persons in the sailing-ship. I think
that it is quite clear that there must be more than one of them. A
single man could not have carried out two deaths in such a way
as to deceive a coroner's jury. There must have been several in
it, and they must have been men of resource and determination.
Their papers they mean to have, be the holder of them who it
may. In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to be the initials of an
individual and becomes the badge of a society."
  "But of what society?"
  "Have you never --" said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward
and sinking his voice --"have you never heard of the Ku Klux
Klan?"
  "I never have."
  Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee.
"Here it is," said he presently:

      "Ku Klux Klan. A name derived from the fanciful resem-
    blance to the sound produced by cocking a rifle. This
    terrible secret society was formed by some ex-Confederate
    soldiers in the Southern states after the Civil War, and it
    rapidly formed local branches in different parts of the
    country, notably in Tennessee, Louisiana, the Carolinas,
    Georgia, and Florida. Its power was used for political
    purposes, principally for the terrorizing of the negro vot-
    ers and the murdering and driving from the country of
    those who were opposed to its views. Its outrages were
    usually preceded by a warning sent to the marked man in
    some fantastic but generally recognized shape -- a sprig of
    oak-leaves in some parts, melon seeds or orange pips in
    others. On receiving this the victim might either openly
    abjure his former ways, or might fly from the country. If
    he braved the matter out, death would unfailingly come
    upon him, and usually in some strange and unforeseen
    manner. So perfect was the organization of the society,
    and so systematic its methods, that there is hardly a case
    upon record where any man succeeded in braving it with
    impunity, or in which any of its outrages were traced
    home to the perpetrators. For some years the organization
    flourished in spite of the efforts of the United States
    government and of the better classes of the community in
    the South. Eventually, in the year 1869, the movement
    rather suddenly collapsed, although there have been spo-
    radic outbreaks of the same sort since that date.

  "You will observe," said Holmes, laying down the volume,
"that the sudden breaking up of the society was coincident with
the disappearance of Openshaw from America with their papers.
It may well have been cause and effect. It is no wonder that he
and his family have some of the more implacable spirits upon
their track. You can understand that this register and diary may
implicate some of the first men in the South, and that there may
be many who will not sleep easy at night until it is recovered."
  "Then the page we have seen --"
  "Is such as we might expect. It ran, if I remember right, 'sent
the pips to A, B, and C' -- that is, sent the society's warning to
them. Then there are successive entries that A and B cleared, or
left the country, and finally that C was visited, with, I fear, a
sinister result for C. Well, I think, Doctor, that we may let some
light into this dark place, and I believe that the only chance
young Openshaw has in the meantime is to do what I have told
him. There is nothing more to be said or to be done to-night, so
hand me over my violin and let us try to forget for half an hour
the miserable weather and the still more miserable ways of our
fellowmen."

  It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with a
subdued brightness through the dim veil which hangs over the
great city. Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when I
came down.
  "You will excuse me for not waiting for you," said he; "I
have, I foresee, a very busy day before me in looking into this
case of young Openshaw's."
  "What steps will you take?" I asked.
  "It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquir-
ies. I may have to go down to Horsham, after all."
  "You will not go there first?"
  "No, I shall commence with the City. Just ring the bell and
the maid will bring up your coffee."
  As I waited, I lifted the unopened newspaper from the table
and glanced my eye over it. It rested upon a heading which sent
a chill to my heart.
  "Holmes," I cried, "you are too late."
  "Ah!" said he, laying down his cup, "I feared as much. How
was it done?" He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was
deeply moved.
  "My eye caught the name of Openshaw, and the heading
'Tragedy Near Waterloo Bridge.' Here is the account:

      "Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook,
    of the H Division, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a
    cry for help and a splash in the water. The night, however,
    was extremely dark and stormy, so that, in spite of the help
    of several passers-by, it was quite impossible to effect a
    rescue. The alarm, however, was given, and, by the aid of
    the water-police, the body was eventually recovered. It
    proved to be that of a young gentleman whose name, as it
    appears from an envelope which was found in his pocket,
    was John Openshaw, and whose residence is near Horsham.
    It is conjectured that he may have been hurrying down to
    catch the last train from Waterloo Station, and that in his
    haste and the extreme darkness he missed his path and
    walked over the edge of one of the small landing-places for
    river steamboats. The body exhibited no traces of violence,
    and there can be no doubt that the deceased had been the
    victim of an unfortunate accident, which should have the
    effect of calling the attention of the authorities to the condi-
    tion of the riverside landing-stages."

  We sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more depressed
and shaken than I had ever seen him.
  "That hurts my pride, Watson," he said at last. "It is a petty
feeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It becomes a personal
matter with me now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my
hand upon this gang. That he should come to me for help, and
that I should send him away to his death --!" He sprang from his
chair and paced about the room in uncontrollable agitation, with
a flush upon his sallow cheeks and a nervous clasping and
unclasping of his long thin hands.
  "They must be cunning devils," he exclaimed at last. "How
could they have decoyed him down there? The Embankment is
not on the direct line to the station. The bridge, no doubt, was
too crowded, even on such a night, for their purpose. Well,
Watson, we shall see who will win in the long run. I am going
out now!"
  "To the police?"
  "No; I shall be my own police. When I have spun the web
they may take the flies, but not before."
  All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was
late in the evening before I returned to Baker Street. Sherlock
Holmes had not come back yet. It was nearly ten o'clock before
he entered, looking pale and worn. He walked up to the side-
board, and tearing a piece from the loaf he devoured it vora-
ciously, washing it down with a long draught of water.
  "You are hungry," I remarked.
  "Starving. It had escaped my memory. I have had nothing
since breakfast."
  "Nothing?"
  "Not a bite. I had no time to think of it."
  "And how have you succeeded?"
  "Well."
  "You have a clue?"
  "I have them in the hollow of my hand. Young Openshaw
shall not long remain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put their
own devilish trade-mark upon them. It is well thought of!"
  "What do you mean?"
  He took an orange from the cupboard, and tearing it to pieces
he squeezed out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five
and thrust them into an envelope. On the inside of the flap he
wrote "S. H. for J. 0." Then he sealed it and addressed it to
"Captain James Calhoun, Bark Lone Star, Savannah, Georgia."
  "That will await him when he enters port," said he, chuck-
ling. "It may give him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a
precursor of his fate as Openshaw did before him."
  "And who is this Captain Calhoun?"
  "The leader of the gang. I shall have the others, but he first."
  "How did you trace it, then?"
  He took a large sheet of paper from his pocket, all covered
with dates and names.
  "I have spent the whole day," said he, "over Lloyd's regis-
ters and files of the old papers, following the future career of
every vessel which touched at Pondicherry in January and Febru-
ary in '83. There were thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which
were reported there during those months. Of these, one, the Lone
Star, instantly attracted my attention, since, although it was
reported as having cleared from London, the name is that which
is given to one of the states of the Union."
  "Texas, I think."
  "I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the ship
must have an American origin."
  "What then?"
  "I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the
bark Lone Star was there in January, '85, my suspicion became a
certainty. I then inquired as to the vessels which lay at present in
the port of London."
  "Yes?"
  "The Lone Star had arrived here last week. I went down to
the Albert Dock and found that she had been taken down the
river by the early tide this morning, homeward bound to Savan-
nah. I wired to Gravesend and learned that she had passed some
time ago, and as the wind is easterly I have no doubt that she is
now past the Goodwins and not very far from the Isle of Wight."
  "What will you do, then?"
  "Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are
as I learn, the only native-born Americans in the ship. The others
are Finns and Germans. I know, also, that they were all three
away from the ship last night. I had it from the stevedore who
has been loading their cargo. By the time that their sailing-ship
reaches Savannah the mail-boat will have carried this letter, and
the cable will have informed the police of Savannah that these
three gentlemen are badly wanted here upon a charge of murder."
  There is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans,
and the murderers of John Openshaw were never to receive the
orange pips which would show them that another, as cunning
and as resolute as themselves, was upon their track. Very long
and very severe were the equinoctial gales that year. We waited
long for news of the Lone Star of Savannah, but none ever
reached us. We did at last hear that somewhere far out in the
Atlantic a shattered stern-post of the boat was seen swinging in
the trough of a wave, with the letters "L. S." carved upon it,
and that is all which we shall ever know of the fate of the Lone
Star.

===============================
                   The "Gloria Scott"

  "I have some papers here," said my friend Sherlock Holmes as
we sat one winter's night on either side of the fire, "which I
really think, Watson, that it would be worth your while to glance
over. These are the documents in the extraordinary case of the
Gloria Scott, and this is the message which struck Justice of the
Peace Trevor dead with horror when he read it."
  He had picked from a drawer a little tarnished cylinder, and.
undoing the tape, he handed me a short note scrawled upon a
half-sheet of slate-gray paper.

      The supply of game for London is going steadily up {it
    ran]. Head-keeper Hudson, we believe, has been now told to
    receive all orders for fly-paper and for preservation of your
    hen-pheasant's life.

  As I glanced up from reading this enigmatical message, I saw
Holmes chuckling at the expression upon my face.
  "You look a little bewildered," said he.
  "I cannot see how such a message as this could inspire horror.
It seems to me to be rather grotesque than otherwise."
  "Very likely. Yet the fact remains that the reader, who was a
fine, robust old man, was knocked clean down by it as if it had
been the butt end of a pistol."
  "You arouse my curiosity," said I. "But why did you say
just now that there were very particular reasons why I should
study this case?"
  "Because it was the first in which I was ever engaged."
  I had often endeavoured to elicit from my companion what
had first turned his mind in the direction of criminal research,
but had never caught him before in a communicative humour.
Now he sat forward in his armchair and spread out the docu-
ments upon his knees. Then he lit his pipe and sat for some time
smoking and turning them over.
  "You never heard me talk of Victor Trevor?" he asked. "He
was the only friend I made during the two years I was at college.
I was never a very sociable fellow, Watson, always rather fond
of moping in my rooms and working out my own little methods
of thought, so that I never mixed much with the men of my year.
Bar fencing and boxing I had few athletic tastes, and then my
line of study was quite distinct from that of the other fellows, so
that we had no points of contact at all. Trevor was the only man
I knew, and that only through the accident of his bull terrier
freezing on to my ankle one morning as I went down to chapel.
  "It was a prosaic way of forming a friendship, but it was
effective. I was laid by the heels for ten days, and Trevor used to
come in to inquire after me. At first it was only a minute's chat
but soon his visits lengthened, and before the end of the term we
were close friends. He was a hearty, full-blooded fellow, full of
spirits and energy, the very opposite to me in most respects, but
we had some subjects in common, and it was a bond of union
when I found that he was as friendless as I. Finally he invited me
down to his father's place at Donnithorpe, in Norfolk, and I
accepted his hospitality for a month of the long vacation.
  "Old Trevor was evidently a man of some wealth and consid-
eration, a J. P., and a landed proprietor. Donnithorpe is a little
hamlet just to the north of Langmere, in the country of the
Broads. The house was an old-fashioned, widespread, oak-beamed
brick building, with a fine lime-lined avenue leading up to it.
There was excellent wild-duck shooting in the fens, remarkably
good fishing, a small but select library, taken over, as I under-
stood, from a former occupant, and a tolerable cook, so that he
would be a fastidious man who could not put in a pleasant month
there.
  "Trevor senior was a widower, and my friend his only son.
  "There had been a daughter, I heard, but she had died of
diphtheria while on a visit to Birmingham. The father interested
me extremely. He was a man of little culture, but with a consid-
erable amount of rude strength, both physically and mentally. He
knew hardly any books, but he had travelled far, had seen much
of the world, and had remembered all that he had learned. In
person he was a thick-set, burly man with a shock of grizzled
hair, a brown, weather-beaten face, and blue eyes which were
keen to the verge of fierceness. Yet he had a reputation for
kindness and charity on the countryside, and was noted for the
leniency of his sentences from the bench.
  "One evening, shortly after my arrival, we were sitting over a
glass of port after dinner, when young Trevor began to talk about
those habits of observation and inference which I had already
formed into a system, although I had not yet appreciated the part
which they were to play in my life. The old man evidently
thought that his son was exaggerating in his description of one or
two trivial feats which I had performed.
  " 'Come, now, Mr. Holmes,' said he, laughing good-
humouredly. 'I'm an excellent subject, if you can deduce any-
thing from me.'
  " 'I fear there is not very much,' I answered. 'I might suggest
that you have gone about in fear of some personal attack within
the last twelvemonth.'
  "The laugh faded from his lips, and he stared at me in great
surprlse.
  " 'Well, that's true enough,' said he. 'You know, Victor,'
turning to his son, 'when we broke up that poaching gang they
swore to knife us, and Sir Edward Holly has actually been
attacked. I've always been on my guard since then, though I
have no idea how you know it.'
  " 'You have a very handsome stick,' I answered. 'By the
inscription I observed that you had not had it more than a year.
But you have taken some pains to bore the head of it and pour
melted lead into the hole so as to make it a formidable weapon. I
argued that you would not take such precautions unless you had
some danger to fear.'
  " 'Anything else?' he asked, smiling.
  " 'You have boxed a good deal in your youth.'
  " 'Right again. How did you know it? Is my nose knocked a
little out of the straight?'
  " 'No,' said I. 'It is your ears. They have the peculiar flatten-
ing and thickening which marks the boxing man.'
  " 'Anything else?'
  " 'You have done a good deal of digging by your callosities.'
  " 'Made all my money at the gold fields.'
  " 'You have been in New Zealand.'
  " 'Right again.'
  " 'You have visited Japan.'
  " 'Quite true.'
  " 'And you have been most intimately associated with some-
one whose initials were J. A., and whom you afterwards were
eager to entirely forget.'
  "Mr. Trevor stood slowly up, fixed his large blue eyes upon
me with a strange wild stare, and then pitched forward, with his
face among the nutshells which strewed the cloth, in a dead
faint.
  "You can imagine, Watson, how shocked both his son and I
were. His attack did not last long, however,- for when we undid
his collar and sprinkled the water from one of the finger-glasses
over his face, he gave a gasp or two and sat up.
  " 'Ah, boys,' said he, forcing a smile, 'I hope I haven't
frightened you. Strong as I look, there is a weak place in my
heart, and it does not take much to knock me over. I don't know
how you manage this, Mr. Holmes, but it seems to me that all
the detectives of fact and of fancy would be children in your
hands. That's your line of life, sir, and you may take the word of
a man who has seen something of the world.'
  "And that recommendation, with the exaggerated estimate of
my ability with which he prefaced it, was, if you will believe
me, Watson, the very first thing which ever made me feel that a
profession might be made out of what had up to that time been
the merest hobby. At the moment, however, I was too much
concerned at the sudden illness of my host to think of anything
else.
  " 'I hope that I have said nothing to pain you?' said I.
  " 'Well, you certainly touched upon rather a tender point.
Might I ask how you know, and how much you know?' He
spoke now in a half-jesting fashion, but a look of terror still
lurked at the back of his eyes.
  " 'It is simplicity itself,' said I. 'When you bared your arm to
draw that fish into the boat I saw that J. A. had been tattooed in
the bend of the elbow. The letters were still legible, but it was
perfectly clear from their blurred appearance, and from the stain-
ing of the skin round them, that efforts had been made to
obliterate them. It was obvious, then, that those initials had once
been very familiar to you, and that you had afterwards wished to
forget them.'
  " 'What an eye you have!' he cried with a sigh of relief. 'It is
just as you say. But we won't talk of it. Of all ghosts the ghosts
of our old loves are the worst. Come into the billiard-room and
have a quiet cigar.'

  "From that day, amid all his cordiality, there was always a
touch of suspicion in Mr. Trevor's manner towards me. Even his
son remarked it. 'You've given the governor such a turn,' said
he, 'that he'll never be sure again of what you know and what
you don't know.' He did not mean to show it, I am sure, but it
was so strongly in his mind that it peeped out at every action. At
last I became so convinced that I was causing him uneasiness
that I drew my visit to a close. On the very day, however, before
I left, an incident occurred which proved in the sequel to be of
importance.
  "We were sitting out upon the lawn on garden chairs, the
three of us, basking in the sun and admiring the view across the
Broads, when a maid came out to say that there was a man at the
door who wanted to see Mr. Trevor.
  " 'What is his name?' asked my host.
  " 'He would not give any.'
  " 'What does he want, then?'
  " 'He says that you know him, and that he only wants a
moment's conversation.'
  " 'Show him round here.' An instant afterwards there ap-
peared a little wizened fellow with a cringing manner and a
shambling style of walking. He wore an open jacket, with a
splotch of tar on the sleeve, a red-and-black check shirt, dunga-
ree trousers, and heavy boots badly worn. His face was thin and
brown and crafty, with a perpetual smile upon it, which showed
an irregular line of yellow teeth, and his crinkled hands were half
closed in a way that is distinctive of sailors. As he came slouch-
ing across the lawn I heard Mr. Trevor make a sort of hiccoughing
noise in his throat, and, jumping out of his chair, he ran into the
house. He was back in a moment, and I smelt a strong reek of
brandy as he passed me.
  " 'Well, my man,' said he. 'What can I do for you?'
  "The sailor stood looking at him with puckered eyes, and with
the same loose-lipped smile upon his face.
  " 'You don't know me?' he asked.
  " 'Why, dear me, it is surely Hudson,' said Mr. Trevor in a
tone of surprise.
  " 'Hudson it is, sir,' said the seaman. 'Why, it's thirty year
and more since I saw you last. Here you are in your house, and
me still picking my salt meat out of the harness cask.'
  " 'Tut, you will find that I have not forgotten old times,'
cried Mr. Trevor, and, walking towards the sailor, he said
something in a low voice. 'Go into the kitchen,' he continued
out loud, 'and you will get food and drink. I have no doubt that I
shall find you a situation.'
  " 'Thank you, sir,' said the seaman, touching his forelock.
'I'm just off a two-yearer in an eight-knot tramp, short-handed at
that, and I wants a rest. I thought I'd get it either with Mr.
Beddoes or with you.'
  " 'Ah!' cried Mr. Trevor. 'You know where Mr. Beddoes is?'
  " 'Bless you, sir, I know where all my old friends are,' said
the fellow with a sinister smile, and he slouched off after the
maid to the kitchen. Mr. Trevor mumbled something to us about
having been shipmate with the man when he was going back to
the diggings, and then, leaving us on the lawn, he went indoors.
An hour later, when we entered the house, we found him stretched
dead drunk upon the dining-room sofa. The whole incident left a
most ugly impression upon my mind, and I was not sorry next
day to leave Donnithorpe behind me, for I felt that my presence
must be a source of embarrassment to my friend.
  "All this occurred during the first month of the long vacation.
I went up to my London rooms, where I spent seven weeks
working out a few experiments in organic chemistry. One day,
however, when the autumn was far advanced and the vacation
drawing to a close, I received a telegram from my friend implor-
ing me to return to Donnithorpe, and saying that he was in great
need of my advice and assistance. Of course I dropped every-
thing and set out for the North once more.
  "He met me with the dog-cart at the station, and I saw at a
glance that the last two months had been very trying ones for
him. He had grown thin and careworn, and had lost the loud,
cheery manner for which he had been remarkable.
  " 'The governor is dying,' were the first words he said.
  " 'Impossible!' I cried. 'What is the matter?'
  " 'Apoplexy. Nervous shock. He's been on the verge all day.
I doubt if we shall find him alive.'
  "I was, as you may think, Watson, horrified at this unex-
pected news.
  " 'What has caused it?' I asked.
  " 'Ah, that is the point. Jump in and we can talk it over while
we drive. You remember that fellow who came upon the evening
before you left us?'
  " 'Perfectly.'
  " 'Do you know who it was that we let into the house that
day?'
  " 'I have no idea.'
  " 'It was the devil, Holmes,' he cried.
  "I stared at him in astonishment.
  " 'Yes, it was the devil himself. We have not had a peaceful
hour since -- not one. The governor has never held up his head
from that evening, and now the life has been crushed out of him
and his heart broken, all through this accursed Hudson.'
  " 'What power had he, then?'
  " 'Ah, that is what I would give so much to know. The
kindly, charitable good old governor -- how could he have fallen
into the clutches of such a ruffian! But I am so glad that you
have come, Holmes. I trust very much to your judgment and
discretion, and I know that you will advise me for the best.'
  "We were dashing along the smooth white country road, with
the long stretch of the Broads in front of us glimmering in the
red light of the setting sun. From a grove upon our left I could
already see the high chimneys and the flagstaff which marked the
squire's dwelling.
  " 'My father made the fellow gardener,'- said my companion,
'and then, as that did not satisfy him, he was promoted to be
butler. The house seemed to be at his mercy, and he wandered
about and did what he chose in it. The maids complained of his
drunken habits and his vile language. The dad raised their wages
all round to recompense them for the annoyance. The fellow
would take the boat and my father's best gun and treat himself to
little shooting trips. And all this with such a sneering, leering,
insolent face that I would have knocked him down twenty times
over if he had been a man of my own age. I tell you, Holmes, I
have had to keep a tight hold upon myself all this time and now
I am asking myself whether, if I had let myself go a littie more, I
might not have been a wiser man.
  " 'Well, matters went from bad to worse with us, and this
animal Hudson became more and more intrusive, until at last, on
his making some insolent reply to my father in my presence one
day, I took him by the shoulders and turned him out of the room.
He slunk away with a livid face and two venomous eyes which
uttered more threats than his tongue could do. I don't know what
passed between the poor dad and him after that, but the dad
came to me next day and asked me whether I would mind
apologizing to Hudson. I refused, as you can imagine, and asked
my father how he could allow such a wretch to take such
liberties with himself and his household.
  " ' "Ah, my boy," said he, "it is all very well to talk, but
you don't know how I am placed. But you shall know, Victor.
I'll see that you shall know, come what may. You wouldn't
believe harm of your poor old father, would you, lad?" He was
very much moved and shut himself up in the study all day,
where I could see through the window that he was writing
busily.
  " 'That evening there came what seemed to me to be a grand
release, for Hudson told us that he was going to leave us. He
walked into the dining-room as we sat after dinner and an-
nounced his intention in the thick voice of a half-drunken man.
  " ' "I've had enough of Norfolk," said he. "I'll run down to
Mr. Beddoes in Hampshire. He'll be as glad to see me as you
were, I daresay."
  " ' "You're not going away in an unkind spirit, Hudson, I
hope," said my father with a tameness which made my blood
boil.
  " ' "I've not had my 'pology," said he sulkily, glancing in
my direction.
  " ' "Victor, you will acknowledge that you have used this
worthy fellow rather roughly," said the dad, turning to me.
  " ' "On the contrary, I think that we have both shown
extraordinary patience towards him," I answered.
  " ' "Oh, you do, do you?" he snarled. "Very good, mate.
We'll see about that!"
  " 'He slouched out of the room and half an hour afterwards
left the house, leaving my father in a state of pitiable nervous-
ness. Night after night I heard him pacing his room, and it was
just as he was recovering his confidence that the blow did at last
fall.'
  " 'And how?' I asked eagerly.
  " 'In a most extraordinary fashion. A letter arrived for my
father yesterday evening, bearing the Fordingham postmark. My
father read it, clapped both his hands to his head, and began
running round the room in little circles like a man who has been
driven out of his senses. When I at last drew him down on to the
sofa, his mouth and eyelids were all puckered on one side, and I
saw that he had a stroke. Dr. Fordham came over at once. We
put him to bed, but the paralysis has spread, he has shown no
sign of returning consciousness, and I think that we shall hardly
find him alive.'
  " 'You horrify me, Trevor!' I cried. 'What then could have
been in this letter to cause so dreadful a result?'
  " 'Nothing. There lies the inexplicable part of it. The message
was absurd and trivial. Ah, my God, it is as I feared!'
  "As he spoke we came round the curve of the avenue and saw
in the fading light that every blind in the house had been drawn
down. As we dashed up to the door, my friend's face convulsed
with grief, a gentleman in black emerged from it.
  " 'When did it happen, doctor?' asked Trevor.
  " 'Almost immediately after you left.'
  " 'Did he recover consciousness?'
  " 'For an instant before the end.'
  " 'Any message for me?'
  " 'Only that the papers were in the back drawer of the Japa-
nese cabinet.'
  "My friend ascended with the doctor to the chamber of death
while I remained in the study, turning the whole matter over and
over in my head, and feeling as sombre as ever I had done in my
life. What was the past of this Trevor, pugilist, traveller, and
gold-digger, and how had he placed himself in the power of this
acid-faced seaman? Why, too, should he faint at an allusion to
the half-effaced initials upon his arm and die of fright when he
had a letter from Fordingham? Then I remembered that Fordingham
was in Hampshire, and that this Mr. Beddoes, whom the seaman
had gone to visit and presumably to blackmail, had also been
mentioned as living in Hampshire. The letter, then, might either
come from Hudson, the seaman, saying that he had betrayed the
guilty secret which appeared to exist, or it might come from
Beddoes, warning an old confederate that such a betrayal was
imminent. So far it seemed clear enough. But then how could
this letter be trivial and grotesque, as described by the son? He
must have misread it. If so, it must have been one of those
ingenious secret codes which mean one thing while they seem to
mean another. I must see this letter. If there was a hidden
meaning in it, I was confident that I could pluck it forth. For an
hour I sat pondering over it in the gloom, until at last a weeping
maid brought in a lamp, and close at her heels came my friend
Trevor, pale but composed, with these very papers which lie
upon my knee held in his grasp. He sat down opposite to me,
drew the lamp to the edge of the table, and handed me a short
note scribbled, as you see, upon a single sheet of gray paper.
'The supply of game for London is going steadily up,' it ran.
'Head-keeper Hudson, we believe, has been now told to receive
all orders for fly-paper and for preservation of your hen-pheasant's
life. '
  "I daresay my face looked as bewildered as yours did just
now when first I read this message. Then I reread it very
carefully. It was evidently as I had thought, and some secret
meaning must lie buried in this strange combination of words. Or
could it be that there was a prearranged significance to such
phrases as 'fly-paper' and 'hen-pheasant'? Such a meaning would
be arbitrary and could not be deduced in any way. And yet I was
loath to believe that this was the case, and the presence of the
word Hudson seemed to show that the subject of the message
was as I had guessed, and that it was from Beddoes rather than
the sailor. I tried it backward, but the combination 'life pheas-
ant's hen' was not encouraging. Then I tried alternate words, but
neither 'the of for' nor 'supply game London' promised to throw
any light upon it.
  "And then in an instant the key of the riddle was in my hands,
and I saw that every third word, beginning with the first, would
give a message which might well drive old Trevor to despair.
  "It was short and terse, the warning, as I now read it to my
companion:
  " 'The game is up. Hudson has told all. Fly for your life.'
  "Victor Trevor sank his face into his shaking hands. 'It must
be that, I suppose,' said he. 'This is worse than death, for it
means disgrace as well. But what is the meaning of these "head-
keepers" and "hen-pheasants"?'
  " 'It means nothing to the message, but it might mean a good
deal to us if we had no other means of discovering the sender.
You see that he has begun by writing "The . . . game . . . is,"
and so on. Afterwards he had, to fulfil the prearranged cipher, to
fill in any two words in each space. He would naturally use the
first words which came to his mind, and if there were so many
which referred to sport among them, you may be tolerably sure
that he is either an ardent shot or interested in breeding. Do you
know anything of this Beddoes?'
  " 'Why, now that you mention it,' said he, 'I remember that
my poor father used to have an invitation from him to shoot over
his preserves every autumn.'
  " 'Then it is undoubtedly from him that the note comes,' said
I. 'It only remains for us to find out what this secret was which
the sailor Hudson seems to have held over the heads of these two
wealthy and respected men.'
  " 'Alas, Holmes, I fear that it is one of sin and shame!' cried
my friend. 'But from you I shall have no secrets. Here is the
statement which was drawn up by my father when he knew that
the danger from Hudson had become imminent. I found it in the
Japanese cabinet, as he told the doctor. Take it and read it to me,
for I have neither the strength nor the courage to do it myself.'
  "These are the very papers, Watson, which he handed to me,
and I will read them to you, as I read them in the old study that
night to him. They are endorsed outside, as you see, 'Some
particulars of the voyage of the bark Gloria Scott, from her
leaving Falmouth on the 8th October, 1855, to her destruction in
N. Lat. 15 degrees 20'. W. Long. 25 degrees 14', on Nov. 6th.' It is
in the form of a letter, and runs in this way.
  " 'My dear. dear son. now that approaching disgrace begins
to darken the closing years of my life, I can write with all truth
and honesty that it is not the terror of the law, it is not the loss of
my position in the county, nor is it my fall in the eyes of all who
have known me, which cuts me to the heart; but it is the thought
that you should come to blush for me -- you who love me and
who have seldom, I hope, had reason to do other than respect
me. But if the blow falls which is forever hanging over me, then
I should wish you to read this, that you may know straight from
me how far I have been to blame. On the other hand, if all
should go well (which may kind God Almighty grant!), then, if
by any chance this paper should be still undestroyed and should
fall into your hands, I conjure you, by all you hold sacred, by
the memory of your dear mother, and by the love which has been
between us, to hurl it into the fire and to never give one thought
to it again.
  " 'If then your eye goes on to read this line, I know that I shall
already have been exposed and dragged from my home, or, as is
more likely, for you know that my heart is weak, be lying with
my tongue sealed forever in death. In either case the time for
suppression is past, and every word which I tell you is the naked
truth, and this I swear as I hope for mercy.
  " 'My name, dear lad, is not Trevor. I was James Armitage in
my younger days, and you can understand now the shock that it
was to me a few weeks ago when your college friend addressed
me in words which seemed to imply that he had surprised my
secret. As Armitage it was that I entered a London banking-
house, and as Armitage I was convicted of breaking my coun-
try's laws, and was sentenced to transportation. Do not think
very harshly of me, laddie. It was a debt of honour, so called,
which I had to pay, and I used money which was not my own to
do it, in the certainty that I could replace it before there could be
any possibility of its being missed. But the most dreadful ill-luck
pursued me. The money which I had reckoned upon never came
to hand, and a premature examination of accounts exposed my
deficit. The case might have been dealt leniently with, but the
laws were more harshly administered thirty years ago than now,
and on my twenty-third birthday I found myself chained as a
felon with thirty-seven other convicts in the 'tween-decks of the
bark Cloria Scott, bound for Australia.
  " 'It was the year '55, when the Crimean War was at its
height, and the old convict ships had been largely used as
transports in the Black Sea. The government was compelled,
therefore, to use smaller and less suitable vessels for sending out
their prisoners. The Gloria Scott had been in the Chinese tea-
trade, but she was an old-fashioned, heavy-bowed, broad-beamed
craft, and the new clippers had cut her out. She was a five-
hundred-ton boat; and besides her thirty-eight jail-birds, she
carried twenty-six of a crew, eighteen soldiers, a captain, three
mates, a doctor, a chaplain, and four warders. Nearly a hundred
souls were in her, all told, when we set sail from Faltnouth.
  " 'The partitions between the cells of the convicts instead of
being of thick oak, as is usual in convict-ships, were quite thin
and frail. The man next to me, upon the aft side, was one whom
I had particularly noticed when we were led down the quay. He
was a young man with a clear, hairless face, a long, thin nose,
and rather nut-cracker jaws. He carried his head very jauntily in
the air, had a swaggering style of walking, and was above all
else, remarkable for his extraordinary height. I don't think any of
our heads would have come up to his shoulder, and I am sure
that he could not have measured less than six and a half feet. It
was strange among so many sad and weary faces to see one
which was full of energy and resolution. The sight of it was to
me like a fire in a snowstorm. I was glad, then, to find that he
was my neighbour, and gladder still when, in the dead of the
night, I heard a whisper close to my ear and found that he had
managed to cut an opening in the board which separated us.
  " ' "Hullo, chummy!" said he, "what's your name, and
what are you here for?"
  " 'I answered him, and asked in turn who I was talking with.
  " ' "I'm Jack Prendergast," said he, "and by God! you'll
learn to bless my name before you've done with me."
  " 'I remembered hearing of his case, for it was one which had
made an immense sensation throughout the country some time
before my own arrest. He was a man of good family and of great
ability, but of incurably vicious habits, who had by an ingenious
system of fraud obtained huge sums of money from the leading
London merchants.
  " ' "Ha, ha! You remember my case!" said he proudly.
  " ' "Very well', indeed."
  " ' "Then maybe you remember something queer about it?"
  " ' "What was that, then?"
  " ' "I'd had nearly a quarter of a million, hadn't I?"
  " ' "So it was said."
  " ' "But none was recovered, eh?"
  " ' "No. "
  " ' "Well, where d'ye suppose the balance is?" he asked.
  " ' "I have no idea," said I.
  " ' "Right between my finger and thumb," he cried. "By
God! I've got mare pounds to my name than you've hairs on
your head. And if you've money, my son, and know how to
handle it and spread it, you can do anything. Now, you don't
think it likely that a man who could do anything is going to wear
his breeches out sitting in the stinking hold of a rat-gutted
beetle-ridden, mouldy old coffin of a Chin China coaster. No,
sir, such a man will look after himself and will look after his
chums. You may lay to that! You hold on to him, and you may
kiss the Book that he'll haul you through."
  " 'That was his style of talk, and at first I thought it meant
nothing; but after a while, when he had tested me and sworn me
in with all possible solemnity, he let me understand that there
really was a plot to gain command of the vessel. A dozen of the
prisoners had hatched it before they came aboard, Prendergast
was the leader, and his money was the motive power.
  " ' "I'd a partner," said he, "a rare good man, as true as a
stock to a barrel. He's got the dibbs, he has, and where do you
think he is at this moment? Why, he's the chaplain of this
ship -- the chaplain, no less! He came aboard with a black coat,
and his papers right, and money enough in his box to buy the
thing right up from keel to main-truck. The crew are his, body
and soul. He could buy 'em at so much a gross with a cash
discount, and he did it before ever they signed on. He's got two
of the warders and Mereer, the second mate, and he'd get the
captain himself, if he thought him worth it."
  " ' "What are we to do, then?" I asked.
  " ' "What do you think?" said he. "We'll make the coats of
some of these soldiers redder than ever the tailor did."
  " ' "But they are armed," said I.
  " ' "And so shall we be, my boy. There's a brace of pistols
for every mother's son of us; and if we can't carry this ship, with
the crew at our back, it's time we were all sent to a young
misses' boarding-school. You speak to your mate upon the left
to-night, and see if he is to be trusted."
  " 'I did so and found my other neighbour to be a young fellow in
much the same position as myself, whose crime had been forg-
ery. His name was Evans, but he afterwards changed it, like
myself, and he is now a rich and prosperous man in the south of
England. He was ready enough to join the conspiracy, as the
only means of saving ourselves, and before we had crossed the
bay there were only two of the prisoners who were not in the
secret. One of these was of weak mind, and we did not dare to
trust him, and the other was suffering from jaundice and could not
be of any use to us.
  " 'From the beginning there was really nothing to prevent us
from taking possession of the ship. The crew were a set of
ruffians, specially picked for the job. The sham chaplain came
into our cells to exhort us, carrying a black bag, supposed to be
full of tracts, and so often did he come that by the third day we
had each stowed away at the foot of our beds a file, a brace of
pistols, a pound of powder, and twenty slugs. Two of the
warders were agents of Prendergast, and the second mate was his
right-hand man. The captain, the two mates, two warders, Lieu-
tenant Martin, his eighteen soldiers, and the doctor were all that
we had against us. Yet, safe as it was, we determihed to neglect
no precaution, and to make our attack suddenly by night. It
came, however, more quickly than we expected, and in this way.
  " 'One evening, about the third week after our start, the
doctor had come down to see one of the prisoners who was ill,
and putting his hand down on the bottom of his bunk, he felt the
outline of the pistols. If he had been silent he might have blown
the whole thing, but he was a nervous little chap, so he gave a
cry of surprise and turned so pale that the man knew what was up
in an instant and seized him. He was gagged before he could
give the alarm and tied down upon the bed. He had unlocked the
door that led to the deck, and we were through it in a rush.
The two sentries were shot down, and so was a corporal who
came running to see what was the matter. There were two more
soldiers at the door of the stateroom, and their muskets seemed
not to be loaded, for they never fired upon us, and they were
shot whi!e trying to fix their bayonets. Then we rushed on into
the captain's cabin, but as we pushed open the door there was an
explosion from within, and there he lay with his brains smeared
over the chart of the Atlantic which was pinned upon the table,
while the chaplain stood with a smoking pistol in his hand at his
elbow. The two mates had both been seized by the crew, and the
whole business seemed to be settled.
  " 'The stateroom was next the cabin, and we flocked in there
and flopped down on the settees, all speaking together, for we
were just mad with the feeling that we were free once more.
There were lockers all round, and Wilson, the sham chaplain,
knocked one of them in, and pulled out a dozen of brown sherry.
We cracked off the necks of the bottles, poured the stuff out into
tumblers, and were just tossing them off when in an instant
without warning there came the roar of muskets in our ears, and
the saloon was so full of smoke that we could not see across the
table. When it cleared again the place was a shambles. Wilson
and eight others were wriggling on the top of each other on the
floor, and the blood and the brown sherry on that table turn me
sick now when I think of it. We were so cowed by the sight that
I think we should have given the job up if it had not been for
Prendergast. He bellowed like a bull and rushed for the door
with all that were left alive at his heels. Out we ran, and there on
the poop were the lieutenant and ten of his men. The swing
skylights above the saloon table had been a bit open, and they
had fired on us through the slit. We got on them before they
could load, and they stood to it like men; but we had the upper
hand of them, and in five minutes it was all over. My God! was
there ever a slaughter-house like that ship! Prendergast was like a
raging devil, and he picked the soldiers up as if they had been
children and threw them overboard alive or dead. There was one
sergeant that was horribly wounded and yet kept on swimming
for a surprising time until someone in mercy blew out his brains.
When the fighting was over there was no one left of our enemies
except just the warders, the mates, and the doctor.
  " 'lt was over them that the great quarrel arose. There were
many of us who were glad enough to win back our freedom, and
yet who had no wish to have murder on our souls. It was one
thing to knock the soldiers over with their muskets in their
hands, and it was another to stand by while men were being
killed in cold blood. Eight of us, five convicts and three sailors,
said that we would not see it done. But there was no moving
Prendergast and those who were with him. Our only chance of
safety lay in making a clean job of it, salid he, and he would not
leave a tongue with power to wag in a witness-box. It nearly
came to our sharing the fate of the prisoners, but at last he said
that if we wished we might take a boat and go. We jumped at the
offer, for we were already sick of these blood-thirsty doings, and
we saw that there would be worse beforo it was done. We were
given a suit of sailor togs each, a barrel of water, two casks, one
of junk and one of biscuits, and a compass. Prendergast threw us
over a chart, told us that we were shiprecked mariners whose
ship had foundered in Lat. 15 degrees and Long. 25 degrees west,
and then cut the painter and let us go.
  " 'And now I come to the most surprising part of my story,
my dear son. The seamen had hauled the fore-yard aback during
the rising, but now as we left them they brought it square again,
and as there was a light wind from the north and east the bark
began to draw slowly away from us. Our boat lay, rising and
falling, upon the long, smooth rollers, and Evans and I, who
were the most educated of the party, were sitting in the sheets
working out our position and planning what coast we should
make for. It was a nice question, for the Cape Verdes were about
five hundred miles to the north of us, and the African coast about
seven hundred to the east. On the whole, as the wind was
coming round to the north, we thought hat Sierra Leone might
be best and turned our head in that direction, the bark being at
that time nearly hull down on our starboard quarter. Suddenly as
we looked at her we saw a dense black cloud of smoke shoot up
from her, which hung like a monstrous tree upon the sky-line. A
few seconds later a roar like thunder burst upon our ears, and as
the smoke thinned away there was no sign left of the Gloria
Scott. In an instant we swept the boat's head round again and
pulled with all our strength for the place where the haze still
trailing over the water marked the scene of this catastrophe.
  " 'It was a long hour before we reached it, and at first we
feared that we had come too late to save anyone. A splintered
boat and a number of crates and fragments of spars rising and
falling on the waves showed us where the vessel had foundered;
but there was no sign of life, and we had turned away in despair,
when we heard a cry for help and saw at some distance a piece
of wreckage with a man lying stretchetl across it. When we
pulled him aboard the boat he proved to be a young seaman of
the name of Hudson, who was so burned and exhausted that he
could give us no account of what had happened until the follow-
ing morning.
  " 'It seemed that after we had left, Prendergast and his gang
had proceeded to put to death the five remaining prisoners. The
two warders had been shot and thrown overboard, and so also
had the third mate. Prendergast then descended into the 'tween-
decks and with his own hands cut the throat of the unfortunate
surgeon. There only remained the first mate, who was a bold and
active man. When he saw the convict approaching him with the
bloody knife in his hand he kicked off his bonds, which he had
somehow contrived to loosen, and rushing down the deck he
plunged into the after-hold. A dozen convicts, who descended
with their pistols in search of him, found him with a match-box
in his hand seated beside an open powder-barrel, which was one
of the hundred carried on board, and swearing that he would
blow all hands up if he were in any way molested. An instant
later the explosion occurred, though Hudson thought it was
caused by the misdirected bullet of one of the convicts rather
than the mate's match. Be the cause what it may, it was the
end of the Gloria Scott and of the rabble who held command of
her.
  " 'Such, in a few words, my dear boy, is the history of this
terrible business in which I was involved. Next day we were
picked up by the brig Hotspur, bound for Australia, whose
captain found no difficulty in believing that we were the survi-
vors of a passenger ship which had foundered. The transport ship
Gloria Scott was set down by the Admiralty as being lost at sea,
and no word has ever leaked out as to her true fate. After an
excellent voyage the Hotspur landed us at Sydney, where Evans
and I changed our names and made our way to the diggings,
where, among the crowds who were gathered from all nations,
we had no difficulty in losing our former identities. The rest I
need not relate. We prospered, we travelled, we came back as
rich colonials to England, and we bought country estates. For
more than twenty years we have led peaceful and useful lives,
and we hoped that our past was forever buried. Imagine, then,
my feelings when in the seaman who came to us I recognized
instantly the man who had been picked off the wreck. He had
tracked us down somehow and had set himself to live upon our
fears. You will understand now how it was that I strove to keep
the peace with him, and you will in some measure sympathize
with me in the fears which fill me, now that he has gone from
me to his other victim with threats upon his tongue.'

  "Underneath is written in a hand so shaky as to be hardly
legible, 'Beddoes writes in cipher to say H. has told all. Sweet
Lord, have mercy on our souls!'
  "That was the narrative which I read that night to young
Trevor, and I think, Watson, that under the circumstances it was
a dramatic one. The good fellow was heart-broken at it, and
went out to the Terai tea planting, where I hear that he is doing
well. As to the sailor and Beddoes, neither of them was ever
heard of again after that day on which the letter of warning was
written. They both disappeared utterly and completely. No com-
plaint had been lodged with the police, so that Beddoes had
mistaken a threat for a deed. Hudson had been seen lurking
about, and it was believed by the police that he had done away
with Beddoes and had fled. For myself I believe that the truth
was exactly the opposite. I think that it is most probable that
Beddoes, pushed to desperation and believing himself to have
been already betrayed, had revenged himself upon Hudson, and
had fled from the country with as much money as he could lay
his hands on. Those are the facts of the case, Doctor, and if they
are of any use to your collection, I am sure that they are very
heartily at your service."

==============================
            The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez

  When I look at the three massive manuscript volumes which
contain our work for the year 1894, I confess that it is very
difficult for me, out of such a wealth of material, to select the
cases which are most interesting in themselves, and at the same
time most conducive to a display of those peculiar powers for
which my friend was famous. As I turn over the pages, I see my
notes upon the repulsive story of the red leech and the terrible
death of Crosby, the banker. Here also I find an account of the
Addleton tragedy, and the singular contents of the ancient British
barrow. The famous Smith-Mortimer succession case comes also
within this period, and so does the tracking and arrest of Huret,
the Boulevard assassin -- an exploit which won for Holmes an
autograph letter of thanks from the French President and the
Order of the Legion of Honour. Each of these would furnish a
narrative, but on the whole I am of opinion that none of them
unites so many singular points of interest as the episode of
Yoxley Old Place, which includes not only the lamentable death
of young Willoughby Smith, but also those subsequent develop-
ments which threw so curious a light upon the causes of the
crime.
  It was a wild, tempestuous night, towards the close of Novem-
ber. Holmes and I sat together in silence all the evening, he
engaged with a powerful lens deciphering the remains of the
original inscription upon a palimpsest, I deep in a recent treatise
upon surgery. Outside the wind howled down Baker Street,
while the rain beat fiercely against the windows. It was strange
there, in the very depths of the town, with ten miles of man's
handiwork on every side of us, to feel the iron grip of Nature,
and to be conscious that to the huge elemental forces all London
was no more than the molehills that dot the fields. I walked to
the window, and looked out on the deserted street. The occa-
sional lamps gleamed on the expanse of muddy road and shining
pavement. A single cab was splashing its way from the Oxford
Street end.
  "Well, Watson, it's as well we have not to turn out to-night,"
said Holmes, laying aside his lens and rolling up the palimpsest.
"I've done enough for one sitting. It is trying work for the eyes.
So far as I can make out, it is nothing more exciting than an
Abbey's accounts dating from the second half of the fifteenth
century. Halloa! halloa! halloa! What's this?"
  Amid the droning of the wind there had come the stamping of
a horse's hoofs, and the long grind of a wheel as it rasped
against the curb. The cab which I had seen had pulled up at our
door.
  "What can he want?" I ejaculated, as a man stepped out of it.
  "Want? He wants us. And we, my poor Watson, want over-
coats and cravats and goloshes, and every aid that man ever
invented to fight the weather. Wait a bit, though! There's the cab
off again! There's hope yet. He'd have kept it if he had wanted
us to come. Run down, my dear fellow, and open the door, for
all virtuous folk have been long in bed."
  When the light of the hall lamp fell upon our midnight visitor,
I had no difficulty in recognizing him. It was young Stanley
Hopkins, a promising detective, in whose career Holmes had
several times shown a very practical interest.
  "Is he in?" he asked, eagerly.
  "Come up, my dear sir," said Holmes's voice from above. "I
hope you have no designs upon us on such a night as this."
  The detective mounted the stairs, and our lamp gleamed upon
his shining waterproof. I helped him out of it, while Holmes
knocked a blaze out of the logs in the grate.
  "Now, my dear Hopkins, draw up and warm your toes," said
he. "Here's a cigar, and the doctor has a prescription containing
hot water and a lemon, which is good medicine on a night like
this. It must be something important which has brought you out
in such a gale."
  "It is indeed, Mr. Holmes. I've had a bustling afternoon, I
promise you. Did you see anything of the Yoxley case in the
latest editions?"
  "I've seen nothing later than the fifteenth century to-day."
  "Well, it was only a paragraph, and all wrong at that, so you
have not missed anything. I haven't let the grass grow under my
feet. It's down in Kent, seven miles from Chatham and three
from the railway line. I was wired for at 3:15, reached Yoxley
Old Place at 5, conducted my investigation, was back at Charing
Cross by the last train, and straight to you by cab."
  "Which means, I suppose, that you are not quite clear about
your case?"
  "lt means that I can make neither head nor tail of it. So far as
I can see, it is just as tangled a business as ever I handled, and
yet at first it seemed so simple that one couldn't go wrong.
There's no motive, Mr. Holmes. That's what bothers me -- I
can't put my hand on a motive. Here's a man dead -- there's no
denying that -- but, so far as I can see, no reason on earth why
anyone should wish him harm."
  Holmes lit his cigar and leaned back in his chair.
  "Let us hear about it," said he.
  "I've got my facts pretty clear," said Stanley Hopkins. "All I
want now is to know what they all mean. The story, so far as I
can make it out, is like this. Some years ago this country house,
Yoxley Old Place, was taken by an elderly man, who gave the
name of Professor Coram. He was an invalid, keeping his bed
half the time, and the other half hobbling round the house with a
stick or being pushed about the grounds by the gardener in a
Bath chair. He was well liked by the few neighbours who ealled
upon him, and he has the reputation down there of being a very
learned man. His household used to consist of an elderly house-
keeper, Mrs. Marker, and of a maid, Susan Tarlton. These have
both been with him since his arrival, and they seem to be women
of excellent character. The professor is writing a learned book,
and he found it necessary, about a year ago, to engage a secre-
tary. The first two that he tried were not successes, but the third,
Mr. Willoughby Smith, a very young man straight from the
university, seems to have been just what his employer wanted.
His work consisted in writing all the morning to the professor's
dictation, and he usually spent the evening in hunting up refer-
ences and passages which bore upon the next day's work. This
Willoughby Smith has nothing against him, either as a boy at
Uppingham or as a young man at Cambridge. I have seen his
testimonials, and from the first he was a decent, quiet, hard-
working fellow, with no weak spot in him at all. And yet this is
the lad who has met his death this morning in the professor's
study under circumstances which can point only to murder."
  The wind howled and screamed at the windows. Holmes and
I drew closer to the fire, while the young inspector slowly and
point by point developed his singular narrative.
  "If you were to search all England," said he, "I don't
suppose you could find a household more self-contained or freer
from outside influences. Whole weeks would pass, and not one
of them go past the garden gate. The professor was buried in his
work and existed for nothing else. Young Smith knew nobody in
the neighbourhood, and lived very much as his employer did.
The two women had nothing to take them from the house.
Mortimer, the gardener, who wheels the Bath chair, is an army
pensioner -- an old Crimean man of excellent character. He does
not live in the house, but in a three-roomed cottage at the other
end of the garden. Those are the only people that you would find
within the grounds of Yoxley Old Place. At the same time, the
gate of the garden is a hundred yards from the main London to
Chatham road. It opens with a latch, and there is nothing to
prevent anyone from walking in.
  "Now I will give you the evidence of Susan Tarlton, who is
the only person who can say anything positive about the matter.
It was in the forenoon, between eleven and twelve. She was
engaged at the moment in hanging some curtains in the upstairs
front bedroom. Professor Coram was still in bed, for when the
weather is bad he seldom rises before midday. The housekeeper
was busied with some work in the back of the house. Wil-
loughby Smith had been in his bedroom, which he uses as a
sitting-room, but the maid heard him at that moment pass along
the passage and descend to the study immediately below her. She
did not see him, but she says that she could not be mistaken in
his quick, firm tread. She did not hear the study door close, but a
minute or so later there was a dreadful cry in the room below. It
was a wild, hoarse scream, so strange and unnatural that it might
have come either from a man or a woman. At the same instant
there was a heavy thud, which shook the old house, and then all
was silence. The maid stood petrified for a moment, and then,
recovering her courage, she ran downstairs. The study door was
shut and she opened it. Inside, young Mr. Willoughby Smith
was stretched upon the floor. At first she could see no injury, but
as she tried to raise him she saw that blood was pouring from the
underside of his neck. It was pierced by a very small but very
deep wound, which had divided the carotid artery. The instru-
ment with which the injury had been inflicted lay upon the carpet
beside him. It was one of those small sealing-wax knives to be
found on old-fashioned writing-tables, with an ivory handle and
a stiff blade. It was part of the fittings of the professor's own
desk.
  "At first the maid thought that young Smith was already dead,
but on pouring some water from the carafe over his forehead he
opened his eyes for an instant. 'The professor,' he murmured -- 'it
was she.' The maid is prepared to swear that those were the
exact words. He tried desperately to say something else,
and he held his right hand up in the air. Then he fell back
dead.
  "In the meantime the housekeeper had also arrived upon the
scene, but she was just too late to catch the young man's dying
words. Leaving Susan with the body, she hurried to the profes-
sor's room. He was sitting up in bed horribly agitated, for he had
heard enough to convince him that something terrible had oc-
curred. Mrs. Marker is prepared to swear that the professor was
still in his night-clothes, and indeed it was impossible for him to
dress without the help of Mortimer, whose orders were to come
at twelve o'clock. The professor declares that he heard the
distant cry, but that he knows nothing more. He can give no
explanation of the young man's last words, 'The professor -- it
was she,' but imagines that they were the outcome of delirium.
He believes that Willoughby Smith had not an enemy in the
world, and can give no reason for the crime. His first action was
to send Mortimer, the gardener, for the local police. A little later
the chief constable sent for me. Nothing was moved before I got
there, and strict orders were given that no one should walk upon
the paths leading to the house. It was a splendid chance of
putting your theories into practice, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. There
was really nothing wanting."
  "Except Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said my companion, with a
somewhat bitter smile. "Well, let us hear about it. What sort of
job did you make of it?"
  "I must ask you first, Mr. Holmes, to glance at this rough
plan, which will give you a general idea of the position of the
professor's study and the various points of the case. It will help
you in following my investigation."
  He unfolded the rough chart, which I here reproduce, and he
laid it across Holmes's knee. I rose and, standing behind
Holmes, studied it over his shoulder.
  "It is very rough, of course, and it only deals with the points
which seem to me to be essential. All the rest you will see later
for yourself. Now, first of all, presuming that the assassin entered
the house, how did he or she come in? Undoubtedly by the
garden path and the back door, from which there is direct access
to the study. Any other way would have been exceedingly
complicated. The escape must have also been made along that
line, for of the two other exits from the room one was blocked
by Susan as she ran downstairs and the other leads straight to the
professor's bedroom. I therefore directed my attention at once to
the garden path, which was saturated with recent rain, and would
certainly show any footmarks.
  "My examination showed me that I was dealing with a cautious
and expert criminal. No footmarks were to be found on the path.
There could be no question, however, that someone had passed
along the grass border which lines the path, and that he had done
so in order to avoid leaving a track. I could not find anything in
the nature of a distinct impression, but the grass was trodden
down, and someone had undoubtedly passed. It could only have
been the murderer, since neither the gardener nor anyone else
had been there that morning, and the rain had only begun during
the night."
  "One moment," said Holmes. "Where does this path lead
to?"
  "To the road."
  "How long is it?"
  "A hundred yards or so."
  "At the point where the path passes through the gate, you
could surely pick up the tracks?"
  "Unfortunately, the path was tiled at that point."
  "Well, on the road itself?"
  "No, it was all trodden into mire."
  "Tut-tut! Well, then, these tracks upon the grass, were they
coming or going?"
  "It was impossible to say. There was never any outline."
  "A large foot or a small?"
  "You could not distinguish."
  Holmes gave an ejaculation of impatience.
  "It has been pouring rain and blowing a hurricane ever since,"
said he. "It will be harder to read now than that palimpsest.
Well, well. it can't be helped. What did you do. Hopkins, after
you had made certain that you had made certain of nothing?"
  "I think I made certain of a good deal, Mr. Holmes. I knew
that someone had entered the house cautiously from without. I
next examined the corridor. It is lined with cocoanut matting and
had taken no impression of any kind. This brought me into the
study itself. It is a scantily furnished room. The main article is a
large writing-table with a fixed bureau. This bureau consists of a
double column of drawers, with a central small cupboard be-
tween them. The drawers were open, the cupboard locked. The
drawers, it seems, were always open, and nothing of value was
kept in them. There were some papers of importance in the
cupboard, but there were no signs that this had been tampered
with, and the professor assures me that nothing was missing. It is
certain that no robbery has been committed.
  "I come now to the body of the young man. It was found near
the bureau, and just to the left of it, as marked upon that chart.
The stab was on the right side of the neck and from behind
forward, so that it is almost impossible tbat it could have been
self-inflicted."
  "Unless he fell upon the knife," said Holmes.
  "Exactly. The idea crossed my mind. But we found the knife
some feet away from the body, so that seems impossible. Then,
of course, there are the man's own dying words. And, finally,
there was this very important piece of evidence which was found
clasped in the dead man's right hand."
  From his pocket Stanley Hopkins drew a small paper packet.
He unfolded it and disclosed a golden pince-nez, with two
broken ends of black silk cord dangling from the end of it.
  "Willoughby Smith had excellent sight," he added. "There can
be no question that this was snatched from the face or the person
of the assassin."
  Sherlock Holmes took the glasses into his hand, and examined
them with the utmost attention and interest. He held them on his
nose, endeavoured to read through them, went to the window
and stared up the street with them, looked at them most minutely
in the full light of the lamp, and finally, with a chuckle, seated
himself at the table and wrote a few lines upon a sheet of paper,
which he tossed across to Stanley Hopkins.
  "That's the best I can do for you," said he. "It may prove to
be of some use."
  The astonished detective read the note aloud. It ran as follows:

     "Wanted. a woman of good address. attired like a lady.
   She has a remarkably thick nose, with eyes which are set
   close upon either side of it. She has a puckered forehead, a
   peering expression, and probably rounded shoulders. There
   are indications that she has had recourse to an optician at
   least twice during the last few months. As her glasses are of
   remarkable strength, and as opticians are not very numer-
   ous, there should be no difficulty in tracing her."

  Holmes smiled at the astonishment of Hopkins, which must
have been reflected upon my features.
  "Surely my deductions are simplicity itself," said he. "It
would be difficult to name any articles which afford a finer field
for inference than a pair of glasses, especially so remarkable a
pair as these. That they belong to a woman I infer from their
delicacy, and also, of course, from the last words of the dying
man. As to her being a person of refinement and well dressed
they are, as you perceive, handsomely mounted in solid gold,
and it is inconceivable that anyone who wore such glasses could
be slatternly in other respects. You will find that the clips are too
wide for your nose, showing that the lady's nose was very broad
at the base. This sort of nose is usually a short and coarse one,
but there is a sufficient number of exceptions to prevent me from
being dogmatic or from insisting upon this point in my descrip-
tion. My own face is a narrow one, and yet I find that I cannot
get my eyes into the centre, nor near the centre, of these glasses.
Therefore, the lady's eyes are set very near to the sides of the
nose. You will perceive, Watson, that the glasses are concave
and of unusual strength. A lady whose vision has been so
extremely contracted all her life is sure to have the physical
characteristics of such vision, which are seen in the forehead, the
eyelids, and the shoulders."
  "Yes," I said, "I can follow each of your arguments. I
confess, however, that I am unable to understand how you arrive
at the double visit to the optician."
  Holmes took the glasses in his hand.
  "You will perceive," he said, "that the clips are lined with
tiny bands of cork to soften the pressure upon the nose. One of
these is discoloured and worn to some slight extent, but the other
is new. Evidently one has fallen off and been replaced. I should
judge that the older of them has not been there more than a few
months. They exactly correspond, so I gather that the lady went
back to the same establishment for the second."
  "By George, it's marvellous!" cried Hopkins. in an ecstasy of
admiration. "To think that I had all that evidence in my hand
and never knew it! I had intended, however, to go the round of
the London opticians."
  "Of course you would. Meanwhile, have you anything more
to tell us about the case?"
  "Nothing, Mr. Holmes. I think that you know as much as I do
now -- probably more. We have had inquiries made as to any
stranger seen on the country roads or at the railway station. We
have heard of none. What beats me is the utter want of all object
in the crime. Not a ghost of a motive can anyone suggest."
  "Ah! there I am not in a position to help you. But I suppose
you want us to come out to-morrow?"
  "If it is not asking too much, Mr. Holmes. There's a train
from Charing Cross to Chatham at six in the morning, and we
should be at Yoxley Old Place between eight and nine."
  "Then we shall take it. Your case has certainly some features
of great interest, and I shall be delighted to look into it. Well,
it's nearly one, and we had best get a few hours' sleep. I daresay
you can manage all right on the sofa in front of the fire. I'll light
my spirit lamp, and give you a cup of coffee before we start."
  The gale had blown itself out next day, but it was a bitter
morning when we started upon our journey. We saw the cold
winter sun rise over the dreary marshes of the Thames and the
long, sullen reaches of the river, which I shall ever associate
with our pursuit of the Andaman Islander in the earlier days of
our career. After a long and weary journey, we alighted at a
small station some miles from Chatham. While a horse was
being put into a trap at the local inn, we snatched a hurried
breakfast, and so we were all ready for business when we at last
arrived at Yoxley Old Place. A constable met us at the garden
gate.
  "Well, Wilson, any news?"
  "No, sir -- nothing."
  "No reports of any stranger seen?"
  "No, sir. Down at the station they are certain that no stranger
either came or went yesterday."
  "Have you had inquiries made at inns and lodgings?"
  "Yes, sir: there is no one that we cannot account for."
  "Well, it's only a reasonable walk to Chatham. Anyone might
stay there or take a train without being observed. This is the
garden path of which I spoke, Mr. Holmes. I'll pledge my word
there was no mark on it yesterday."
  "On which side were the marks on the grass?"
  "This side, sir. This narrow margin of grass between the path
and the flowerbed. I can't see the traces now, but they were clear
to me then."
  "Yes, yes: someone has passed along," said Holmes, stoop-
ing over the grass border. "Our lady must have picked her steps
carefully, must she not, since on the one side she would leave a
track on the path, and on the other an even clearer one on the
soft bed?"
  "Yes, sir, she must have been a cool hand."
  I saw an intent look pass over Holmes's face.
  "You say that she must have come back this way?"
  "Yes, sir, there is no other."
  "On this strip of grass?"
  "Certainly, Mr. Holmes."
  "Hum! It was a very remarkable performance -- very remark-
able. Well, I think we have exhausted the path. Let us go
farther. This garden door is usually kept open, I suppose? Then
this visitor had nothing to do but to walk in. The idea of murder
was not in her mind, or she would have provided herself with
some sort of weapon, instead of having to pick this knife off the
writing-table. She advanced along this corridor, leaving no traces
upon the cocoanut matting. Then she found herself in this study.
How long was she there? We have no means of judging."
  "Not more than a few minutes, sir. I forgot to tell you that
Mrs. Marker, the housekeeper, had been in there tidying not
very long before -- about a quarter of an hour, she says."
  "Well, that gives us a limit. Our lady enters this room, and
what does she do? She goes over to the writing-table. What for?
Not for anything in the drawers. If there had been anything
worth her taking, it would surely have been locked up. No, it
was for something in that wooden bureau. Halloa! what is that
scratch upon the face of it? Just hold a match, Watson. Why did
you not tell me of this, Hopkins?"
  The mark which he was examining began upon the brasswork
on the righthand side of the keyhole, and extended for about four
inches, where it had scratched the varnish from the surface.
  "I noticed it, Mr. Holmes, but you'll always find scratches
round a keyhole."
  "This is recent, quite recent. See how the brass shines where
it is cut. An old scratch would be the same colour as the surface.
Look at it through my lens. There's the varnish, too, like earth
on each side of a furrow. Is Mrs. Marker there?"
  A sad-faced, elderly woman came into the room.
  "Did you dust this bureau yesterday morning?"
  "Yes, sir."
  "Did you notice this scratch?"
  "No, sir, I did not."
  "I am sure you did not, for a duster would have swept away
these shreds of varnish. Who has the key of this bureau?"
  "The professor keeps it on his watch-chain."
  "Is it a simple key?"
  "No, sir, it is a Chubb's key."
  "Very good. Mrs. Marker, you can go. Now we are making a
little progress. Our lady enters the room, advances to the bureau,
and either opens it or tries to do so. While she is thus engaged,
young Willoughby Smith enters the room. In her hurry to with-
draw the key, she makes this scratch upon the door. He seizes
her, and she, snatching up the nearest object, which happens to
be this knife, strikes at him in order to make him let go his hold.
The blow is a fatal one. He falls and she escapes, either with or
without the object for which she has come. Is Susan, the maid,
there? Could anyone have got away through that door after the
time that you heard the cry, Susan?"
  "No, sir, it is impossible. Before I got down the stair, I'd
have seen anyone in the passage. Besides, the door never opened,
or I would have heard it."
  "That settles this exit. Then no doubt the lady-went out the
way she came. I understand that this other passage leads only to
the professor's room. There is no exit that way?"
  "No, sir."
  "We shall go down it and make the acquaintance of the
professor. Halloa, Hopkins! this is very important, very impor-
tant indeed. The professor's corridor is also lined with cocoanut
matting."
  "Well, sir, what of that?"
  "Don't you see any bearing upon the case? Well, well. I don't
insist upon it. No doubt I am wrong. And yet it seems to me to
be suggestive. Come with me and introduce me."
  We passed down the passage, which was of the same length as
that which led to the garden. At the end was a short flight of
steps ending in a door. Our guide knocked, and then ushered us
into the professor's bedroom.
  It was a very large chamber, lined with innumerable volumes,
which had overflowed from the shelves and lay in piles in the
corners, or were stacked all round at the base of the cases. The
bed was in the centre of the room, and in it, propped up with
pillows, was the owner of the house. I have seldom seen a more
remarkable-looking person. It was a gaunt, aquiline face which
was turned towards us, with piercing dark eyes, which lurked in
deep hollows under overhung and tufted brows. His hair and
beard were white, save that the latter was curiously stained with
yellow around his mouth. A cigarette glowed amid the tangle of
white hair, and the air of the room was fetid with stale tobacco
smoke. As he held out his hand to Holmes, I perceived that it
was also stained with yellow nicotine.
  "A smoker, Mr. Holmes?" said he, speaking in well-chosen
English, with a curious little mincing accent. "Pray take a
cigarette. And you, sir? I can recommend them, for I have them
especially prepared by lonides, of Alexandria. He sends me a
thousand at a time, and I grieve to say that I have to arrange for
a fresh suprly every fortnight. Bad, sir, very bad, but an old
man has few pleasures. Tobacco and my work -- that is all that is
left to me."
  Holmes had lit a cigarette and was shooting little darting
glances all over the room.
  "Tobacco and my work, but now only tobacco," the old man
exclaimed. "Alas! what a fatal interruption! Who could have
foreseen such a terrible catastrophe? So estimable a young man!
I assure you that, after a few months' training, he was an
admirable assistant. What do you think of the matter, Mr.
Holmes?"
  "I have not yet made up my mind."
  "I shall indeed be indebted to you if you can throw a light
where all is so dark to us. To a poor bookworm and invalid like
myself such a blow is paralyzing. I seem to have lost the faculty
of thought. But you are a man of action -- you are a man of
affairs. It is part of the everyday routine of your life. You can
preserve your balance in every emergency. We are fortunate,
indeed, in having you at our side."
  Holmes was pacing up and down one side of the room whilst
the old professor was talking. I observed that he was smoking
with extraordinary rapidity. It was evident that he shared our
host's liking for the fresh Alexandrian cigarettes.
  "Yes, sir, it is a crushing blow," said the old man. "That is
my magnum opus -- the pile of papers on the side table yonder. It
is my analysis of the documents found in the Coptic monasteries
of Syria and Egypt, a work which will cut deep at the very
foundation of revealed religion. With my enfeebled health I do
not know whether I shall ever be able to complete it, now that
my assistant has been taken from me. Dear me! Mr. Holmes,
why, you are even a quicker smoker than I am myself."
  Holmes smiled.
  "I am a connoisseur," said he, taking another cigarette from
the box -- his fourth -- and lighting it from the stub of that which
he had finished. "I will not trouble you with any lengthy cross-
examination, Professor Coram, since I gather that you were in
bed at the time of the crime, and could know nothing about it. I
would only ask this: What do you imagine that this poor fellow
meant by his last words: 'The professor -- it was she'?"
  The professor shook his head.
  "Susan is a country girl," said he, "and you know the
incredible stupidity of that class. I fancy that the poor fellow
murmured some incoherent, delirious words, and that she twisted
them into this meaningless message."
  "I see. You have no explanation yourself of the tragedy?"
  "Possibly an accident, possibly -- I only breathe it among
ourselves -- a suicide. Young men have their hidden troubles --
some affair of the heart, perhaps, which we have never known.
It is a more probable supposition than murder."
  "But the eyeglasses?"
  "Ah! I am only a student -- a man of dreams. I cannot explain
the practical things of life. But still, we are aware, my friend,
that love-gages may take strange shapes. By all means take
another cigarette. It is a pleasure to see anyone appreciate them
so. A fan, a glove, glasses -- who knows what article may be
carried as a token or treasured when a man puts an end to his
life? This gentleman speaks of footsteps in the grass, but, after
all, it is easy to be mistaken on such a point. As to the knife, it
might well be thrown far from the unfortunate man as he fell. It
is possible that I speak as a child, but to me it seems that
Willoughby Smith has met his fate by his own hand."
  Holmes seemed struck by the theory thus put forward, and hc
continued to walk up and down for some time, lost in thought
and consuming cigarette after cigarette.
  "Tell me, Professor Coram," he said. at last, "what is in that
cupboard in the bureau?"
  "Nothing that would help a thief. Family papers, letters from
my poor wife, diplomas of universities which have done me
honour. Here is the key. You can look for yourself."
  Holmes picked up the key, and looked at it for an instant, then
he handed it back.
  "No, I hardly think that it would help me," said he. "I
should prefer to go quietly down to your garden, and turn the
whole matter over in my head. There is something to be said for
the theory of suicide which you have put forward. We must
apologize for having intruded upon you, Professor Coram, and I
promise that we won't disturb you until after lunch. At two
o'clock we will come again, and report to you anything which
may have happened in the interval."
  Holmes was curiously distrait, and we walked up and down
the garden path for some time in silence.
  "Have you a clue?" I asked, at last.
  "It depends upon those cigarettes that I smoked," said he. "It
is possible that I am utterly mistaken. The cigarettes will show
me."
  "My dear Holmes," I exclaimed, "how on earth --"
  "Well, well, you may see for yourself. If not, there's no harm
done. Of course, we always have the optician clue to fall back
upon, but I take a short cut when I can get it. Ah, here is the
good Mrs. Marker! Let us enjoy five minutes of instructive
conversation with her."
  I may have remarked before that Holmes had, when he liked,
a peculiarly ingratiating way with women, and that he very
readily established terms of confidence with them. In half the
time which he had named, he had captured the housekeeper's
goodwill and was chatting with her as if he had known her for
years.
  "Yes, Mr. Holmes, it is as you say, sir. He does smoke
something terrible. All day and sometimes all night, sir. I've
seen that room of a morning -- well, sir, you'd have thought it
was a London fog. Poor young Mr. Smith, he was a smoker
also, but not as bad as the professor. His health -- well, I don't
know that it's better nor worse for the smoking."
  "Ah!" said Holmes, "but it kills the appetite."
  "Well, I don't know about that, sir."
  "I suppose the professor eats hardly anything?"
  "Well, he is variable. I'll say that for him."
  "I'll wager he took no breakfast this morning, and won't face
his lunch after all the cigarettes I saw him consume."
  "Well, you're out there, sir, as it happens, for he ate a
remarkable big breakfast this morning. I don't know when I've
known him make a better one, and he's ordered a good dish of
cutlets for his lunch. I'm surprised myself, for since I came into
that room yesterday and saw young Mr. Smith lying there on the
floor, I couldn't bear to look at food. Well, it takes all sorts to
make a world, and the professor hasn't let it take his appetite
away."
  We loitered the morning away in the garden. Stanley Hopkins
had gone down to the village to look into some rumours of a
strange woman who had been seen by some children on the
Chatham Road the previous morning. As to my friend, all his
usual energy seemed to have deserted him. I had never known
him handle a case in such a half-hearted fashion. Even the news
brought back by Hopkins that he had found the children, and that
they had undoubtedly seen a woman exactly corresponding with
Holmes's description, and wearing either spectacles or eyeglasses,
failed to rouse any sign of keen interest. He was more attentive
when Susan, who waited upon us at lunch, volunteered the
information that she believed Mr. Smith had been out for a walk
yesterday morning, and that he had only returned half an hour
before the tragedy occurred. I could not myself see the bearing
of this incident, but I clearly perceived that Holmes was weaving
it into the general scheme which he had formed in his brain.
Suddenly he sprang from his chair and glanced at his watch.
"Two o'clock, gentlemen." said he. "We must go up and have
it out with our friend, the professor."
  The old man had just finished his lunch, and certainly his
empty dish bore evidence to the good appetite with which his
housekeeper had credited him. He was, indeed, a weird figure as
he turned his white mane and his glowing eyes towards us. The
eternal cigarette smouldered in his mouth. He had been dressed
and was seated in an armchair by the fire.
  "Well, Mr. Holmes, have you solved this mystery yet?" He
shoved the large tin of cigarettes which stood on a table beside
him towards my companion. Holmes stretched out his hand at
the same moment, and between them they tipped the box over
the edge. For a minute or two we were all on our knees retriev-
ing stray cigarettes from impossible places. When we rose again,
I observed Holmes's eyes were shining and his cheeks tinged
with colour. Only at a crisis have I seen those battle-signals
flying .
  "Yes," said he, "I have solved it."
  Stanley Hopkins and I stared in amazement. Something like a
sneer quivered over the gaunt features of the old professor.
  "Indeed! In the garden?"
  "No, here."
  "Here! When?"
  "This instant."
  "You are surely joking, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You compel
me to tell you that this is too serious a matter to be treated in
such a fashion."
  "I have forged and tested every link of my chain, Professor
Coram, and I am sure that it is sound. What your motives are, or
what exact part you play in this strange business, I am not yet
able to say. In a few minutes I shall probably hear it from your
own lips. Meanwhile I will reconstruct what is past for your
benefit, so that you may know the information which I still
require.
  "A lady yesterday entered your study. She came with the
intention of possessing herself of certain documents which were
in your bureau. She had a key of her own. I have had an
opportunity of examining yours, and I do not find that slight
discolouration which the scratch made upon the varnish would
have produced. You were not an accessory, therefore, and she
came, so far as I can read the evidence, without your knowledge
to rob you."
  The professor blew a cloud from his lips. "This is most
interesting and instructive," said he. "Have you no more to
add? Surely, having traced this lady so far, you can also say
what has become of her."
  "I will endeavour to do so. In the first place she was seized
by your secretary, and stabbed him in order to escape. This
catastrophe I am inclined to regard as an unhappy accident, for I
am convinced that the lady had no intention of inflicting so
grievous an injury. An assassin does not come unarmed. Horri-
fied by what she had done, she rushed wildly away from the
scene of the tragedy. Unfortunately for her, she had lost her
glasses in the scuffle, and as she was extremely shortsighted she
was really helpless without them. She ran down a corridor,
which she imagined to be that by which she had come -- both
were lined with cocoanut matting -- and it was only when it was
too late that she understood that she had taken the wrong pas-
sage, and that her retreat was cut off behind her. What was she
to do? She could not go back. She could not remain where she
was. She must go on. She went on. She mounted a stair, pushed
open a door, and found herself in your room."
  The old man sat with his mouth open, staring wildly at
Holmes. Amazement and fear were stamped upon his expressive
features. Now, with an effort, he shrugged his shoulders and
burst into insincere laughter.
  "All very fine, Mr. Holmes," said he. "But there is one little
flaw in your splendid theory. I was myself in my room, and I
never left it during the day."
  "I am aware of that, Professor Coram."
  "And you mean to say that I could lie upon that bed and not
be aware that a woman had entered my room?"
  "I never said so. You were aware of it. You spoke with her.
You recognized her. You aided her to escape."
  Again the professor burst into high-keyed laughter. He had
risen to his feet, and his eyes glowed like embers.
  "You are mad!" he cried. "You are talking insanely. I helped
her to escape? Where is she now?"
  "She is there," said Holmes, and he pointed to a high book-
case in the corner of the room.
  I saw the old man throw up his arms, a terrible convulsion
passed over his grim face, and he fell back in his chair. At the
same instant the bookcase at which Holmes pointed swung round
upon a hinge, and a woman rushed out into the room. "You are
right!" she cried, in a strange foreign voice. "You are right! I
am here."
  She was brown with the dust and draped with the cobwebs
which had come from the walls of her hiding-place. Her face,
too, was streaked with grime, and at the best she could never
have been handsome, for she had the exact physical characteris-
tics which Holmes had divined, with, in addition, a long and
obstinate chin. What with her natural blindness, and what with
the change from dark to light, she stood as one dazed, blinking
about her to see where and who we were. And yet, in spite of all
these disadvantages, there was a certain nobility in the woman's
bearing -- a gallantry in the defiant chin and in the upraised head,
which compelled something of respect and admiration.
  Stanley Hopkins had laid his hand upon her arm and claimed
her as his prisoner, but she waved him aside gently, and yet with
an over-mastering dignity which compelled obedience. The old
man lay back in his chair with a twitching face, and stared at her
with brooding eyes.
  "Yes, sir, I am your prisoner," she said. "From where I
stood I could hear everything, and I know that you have learned
the truth. I confess it all. It was I who killed the young man. But
you are right -- you who say it was an accident. I did not even
know that it was a knife which I held in my hand, for in my
despair I snatched anything from the table and struck at him to
make him let me go. It is the truth that I tell."
  "Madam," said Holmes, "I am sure that it is the truth. I fear
that you are far from well."
  She had turned a dreadful colour, the more ghastly under the
dark dust-streaks upon her face. She seated herself on the side of
the bed; then she resumed.
  "I have only a little time here," she said, "but I would have
you to know the whole truth. I am this man's wife. He is not an
Englishman. He is a Russian. His name I will not tell."
  For the first time the old man stirred. "God bless you, Anna!"
he cried. "God bless you!"
  She cast a look of the deepest disdain in his direction. "Why
should you cling so hard to that wretched life of yours, Sergius?"
said she. "It has done harm to many and good to none -- not
even to yourself. However, it is not for me to cause the frail
thread to be snapped before God's time. I have enough already
upon my soul since I crossed the threshold of this cursed house.
But I must speak or I shall be too late.
  "I have said, gentlemen, that I am this man's wife. He was
fifty and I a foolish girl of twenty when we married. It was in a
city of Russia, a university -- I will not name the place."
  "God bless you, Anna!" murmured the old man again.
  "We were reformers -- revolutionists -- Nihilists, you under-
stand. He and I and many more. Then there came a time of
trouble, a police officer was killed, many were arrested, evi-
dence was wanted, and in order to save his own life and to earn a
great reward, my husband betrayed his own wife and his com-
panions. Yes, we were all arrested upon his confession. Some of
us found our way to the gallows, and some to Siberia. I was
among these last, but my term was not for life. My husband
came to England with his ill-gotten gains and has lived in quiet
ever since, knowing well that if the Brotherhood knew where he
was not a week would pass before justice would be done."
  The old man reached out a trembling hand and helped himself
to a cigarette. "I am in your hands, Anna," said he. "You were
always good to me."
  "I have not yet told you the height of his villainy," said she.
"Among our comrades of the Order, there was one who was the
friend of my heart. He was noble, unselfish, loving -- all that my
husband was not. He hated violence. We were all guilty -- if that
is guilt -- but he was not. He wrote forever dissuading us from
such a course. These letters would have saved him. So would my
diary, in which, from day to day, I had entered both my feelings
towards him and the view which each of us had taken. My
husband found and kept both diary and letters. He hid them, and
he tried hard to swear away the young man's life. In this he
failed, but Alexis was sent a convict to Siberia, where now, at
this moment, he works in a salt mine. Think of that, you villain,
you villain! -- now, now, at this very moment, Alexis, a man
whose name you are not worthy to speak, works and lives like a
slave, and yet I have your life in my hands, and I let you go."
  "You were always a noble woman, Anna," said the old man,
puffing at his cigarette.
  She had risen, but she fell back again with a little cry of pain.
  "I must finish," she said. "When my term was over I set
myself to get the diary and letters which, if sent to the Russian
government, would procure my friend's release. I knew that my
husband had come to England. After months of searching I dis-
covered where he was. I knew that he still had the diary, for
when I was in Siberia I had a letter from him once, reproaching
me and quoting some passages from its pages. Yet I was sure
that, with his revengeful nature, he would never give it to me of
his own free-will. I must get it for myself. With this object I
engaged an agent from a private detective firm, who entered my
husband's house as a secretary -- it was your second secretary
Sergius, the one who left you so hurriedly. He found that papers
were kept in the cupboard, and he got an impression of the key.
He would not go farther. He furnished me with a plan of the
house, and he told me that in the forenoon the study was always
empty, as the secretary was employed up here. So at last I took
my courage in both hands, and I came down to get the papers for
myself. I succeeded; but at what a cost!
  "I had just taken the papers and was locking the cupboard,
when the young man seized me. I had seen him already that
morning. He had met me on the road, and I had asked him to tell
me where Professor Coram lived, not knowing that he was in his
employ.
  "Exactly! Exactly!" said Holmes. "The secretary came back,
and told his employer of the woman he had met. Then, in his last
breath, he tried to send a message that it was she -- the she whom
he had just discussed with him."
  "You must let me speak," said the woman, in an imperative
voice, and her face contracted as if in pain. "When he had fallen
I rushed from the room, chose the wrong door, and found myself
in my husband's room. He spoke of giving me up. I showed him
that if he did so, his life was in my hands. If he gave me to the
law, I could give him to the Brotherhood. It was not that I
wished to live for my own sake, but it was that I desired to
accomplish my purpose. He knew that I would do what I said --
that his own fate was involved in mine. For that reason, and for
no other, he shielded me. He thrust me into that dark hiding-
place -- a relic of old days, known only to himself. He took his
meals in his own room, and so was able to give me part of his
food. It was agreed that when the police left the house I should
slip away by night and come back no more. But in some way
you have read our plans." She tore from the bosom of her dress
a small packet. "These are my last words," said she; "here is
the packet which will save Alexis. I confide it to your honour
and to your love of justice. Take it! You will deliver it at the
Russian Embassy. Now, I have done my duty, and --"
  "Stop her!" cried Holmes. He had bounded across the room
and had wrenched a small phial from her hand.
  "Too late!" she said, sinking back on the bed. "Too late! I
took the poison before I left my hiding-place. My head swims! I
am going! I charge you, sir, to remember the packet."

  "A simple case, and yet, in some ways, an instructive one,"
Holmes remarked, as we travelled back to town. "It hinged from
the outset upon the pince-nez. But for the fortunate chance of the
dying man having seized these, I am not sure that we could ever
have reached our solution. It was clear to me, from the strength
of the glasses, that the wearer must have been very blind and
helpless when deprived of them. When you asked me to believe
that she walked along a narrow strip of grass without once
making a false step, I remarked, as you may remember, that it
was a noteworthy performance. In my mind I set it down as an
impossible performance, save in the unlikely case that she had a
second pair of glasses. I was forced, therefore, to consider
seriously the hypothesis that she had remained within the house.
On perceiving the similarity of the two corridors. it became clear
that she might very easily have made such a mistake, and, in that
case, it was evident that she must have entered the professor's
room. I was keenly on the alert, therefore, for whatever would
bear out this supposition, and I examined the room narrowly for
anything in the shape of a hiding-place. The carpet seemed
continuous and firmly nailed, so I dismissed the idea of a
trap-door. There might well be a recess behind the books. As
you are aware, such devices are common in old libraries. I ob-
served that books were piled on the floor at all other points, but
that one bookcase was left clear. This, then, might be the door. I
could see no marks to guide me, but the carpet was of a dun
colour, which lends itself very well to examination. I therefore
smoked a great number of those excellent cigarettes, and I
dropped the ash all over the space in front of the suspected
bookcase. It was a simple trick, but exceedingly effective. I then
went downstairs, and I ascertained, in your presence, Watson,
without your perceiving the drift of my remarks, that Professor
Coram's consumption of food had increased -- as one would
expect when he is supplying a second person. We then ascended
to the room again, when, by upsetting the cigarette-box, I ob-
tained a very excellent view of the floor, and was able to see
quite clearly, from the traces upon the cigarette ash, that the
prisoner had in our absence come out from her retreat. Well
Hopkins, here we are at Charing Cross, and I congratulate you
on having brought your case to a successful conclusion. You are
going to headquarters, no doubt. I think, Watson, you and I will
drive together to the Russian Embassy."

==========================
                   The Greek Interpreter

  During my long and intimate acquaintance with Mr. Sherlock
Holmes I had never heard him refer to his re}ations, and hardly
ever to his own early life. This reticence upon his part had
increased the somewhat inhuman effect which he produced upon
me, until sometimes I found myself regarding him as an isolated
phenomenon, a brain without a heart, as deficient in human
sympathy as he was preeminent in intelligence. His aversion to
women and his disinclination to form new friendships were both
typical of his unemotional character, but not more so than his
complete suppression of every reference to his own people. I had
come to believe that he was an orphan with no relatives living;
but one day. to my very great surprise, he began to talk to me
about his brother.
  It was after tea on a summer evening, and the conversation,
which had roamed in a desultory, spasmodic fashion from golf
clubs to the causes of the change in the obliquity of the ecliptic,
came round at last to the question of atavism and hereditary
aptitudes. The point under discussion was, how far any singular
gift in an individual was due to his ancestry and how far to his
own early training.
  "In your own case," said I, "from all that you have told me,
it seems obvious that your faculty of observation and your
peculiar facility for deduction are due to your own systematic
training."
  "To some extent," he answered thoughtfully. "My ancestors
were country squires, who appear to have led much the same life
as is natural to their class. But, none the less, my turn that way
is in my veins, and may have come with my grandmother, who
was the sister of Vernet, the French artist. Art in the blood is
liable to take the strangest forms."
  "But how do you know that it is hereditary?"
  "Because my brother Mycroft possesses it in a larger degree
than I do."
  This was news to me indeed. If there were another man with
such singular powers in England, how was it that neither police
nor public had heard of him? I put the question, with a hint that
it was my companion's modesty which made him acknowledge
his brother as his superior. Holmes laughed at my suggestion.
  "My dear Watson," said he, "I cannot agree with those who
rank modesty among the virtues. To the logician all things
should be seen exactly as they are, and to underestimate one's
self is as much a departure from truth as to exaggerate one's own
powers. When I say, therefore, that Mycroft has better powers of
observation than I, you may take it that I am speaking the exact
and literal truth."
  "Is he your junior?"
  "Seven years my senior."
  "How comes it that he is unknown?''
  "Oh, he is very well known in his own circle."
  "Where, then?"
  "Well, in the Diogenes Club, for example."
  I had never heard of the institution, and my face must have
proclaimed as much, for Sherlock Homes pulled out his watch.
  "The Diogenes Club is the queerest club in London, and
Mycroft one of the queerest men. He's always there from quarter
to five to twenty to eight. It's six now, so if you care for a stroll
this beautiful evening I shall be very happy to introduce you to
two curiosities."
  Five minutes later we were in the street, walking towards
Regent's Circus.
  "You wonder," said my companion, "why it is that Mycroft
does not use his powers for detective work. He is incapable of
it."
  "But I thought you said --"
  "I said that he was my superior in observation and deduction.
If the art of the detective began and ended in reasoning from an
armchair, my brother would be the greatest criminal agent that
ever lived. But he has no ambition and no energy. He will not
even go out of his way to verify his own solutions, and would
rather be considered wrong than take the trouble to prove himself
right. Again and again I have taken a problem to him, and have
received an explanation which has afterwards proved to be the
correct one. And yet he was absolutely incapable of working out
the practical points which must be gone into before a case could
be laid before a judge or jury."
  "It is not his profession, then?"
  "By no means. What is to me a means of livelihood is to him
the merest hobby of a dilettante. He has an extraordinary faculty
for figures, and audits the books in some of the government
departments. Mycroft lodges in Pall Mall, and he walks round
the corner into Whitehall every morning and back every evening.
From year's end to year's end he takes no other exercise, and is
seen nowhere else, except only in the Diogenes Club, which is
just opposite his rooms."
  "I cannot recall the name."
  "Very likely not. There are many men in London, you know,
who, some from shyness, some from misanthropy, have no wish
for the company of their fellows. Yet they are not averse to
comfortable chairs and the latest periodicals. It is for the conve-
nience of these that the Diogenes Club was started, and it now
contains the most unsociable and unclubable men in town. No
member is permitted to take the least notice of any other one.
Save in the Stranger's Room, no talking is, under any circum-
stances, allowed. and three offences, if brought to the notice of
the committee, render the talker liable to expulsion. My brother
was one of the founders, and I have myself found it a very
soothing atmosphere."
  We had reached Pall Mall as we talked, and were walking
down it from the St. James's end. Sherlock Holmes stopped at a
door some little distance from the Carlton, and, cautioning me
not to speak, he led the way into the hall. Through the glass
panelling I caught a glimpse of a large and luxurious room, in
which a considerable number of men were sitting about and
reading papers, each in his own little nook. Holmes showed me
into a small chamber which looked out into Pall Mall, and then,
leaving me for a minute, he came back with a companion whom
I knew could only be his brother.
  Mycroft Holmes was a much larger and stouter man than Sher-
lock. His body was absolutely corpulent, but his face, though
massive, had preserved something of the sharpness of expression
which was so remarkable in that of his brother. His eyes, which
were of a peculiarly light, watery gray, seemed to always retain
that far-away, introspective look which I had only observed in
Sherlock's when he was exerting his full powers.
  "I am glad to meet you, sir," said he, putting out a broad, fat
hand like the flipper of a seal. "I hear of Sherlock everywhere
since you became his chronicler. By the way, Sherlock, I ex-
pected to see you round last week to consult me over that Manor
House case. I thought you might be a little out of your depth."
  "No, I solved it," said my friend, smiling.
  "It was Adams, of course."
  "Yes, it was Adams."
  "I was sure of it from the first." The two sat down together in
the bow-window of the club. "To anyone who wishes to study
mankind this is the spot," said Mycroft. "Look at the magnifi-
cent types! Look at these two men who are coming towards us,
for example."
  "The billiard-marker and the other?"
  "Precisely. What do you make of the other?"
  The two men had stopped opposite the window. Some chalk
marks over the waistcoat pocket were the only signs of billiards
which I could see in one of them. The other was a very small,
dark fellow, with his hat pushed back and several packages
under his arm.
  "An old soldier, I perceive," said Sherlock.
  "And very recently discharged," remarked the brother.
  "Served in India, I see."
  "And a non-commissioned officer."
  "Royal Artillery, I fancy,'' said Sherlock.
  "And a widower."
  "But with a child."
  "Children, my dear boy, children."
  "Come," said I. laughing, "this is a little too much."
  "Surely." answered Holmes, "it is not hard to say that a man
with that bearing. expression of authority, and sun-baked skin. is
a soldier, is more than a private, and is not long from India."
  "That he has not left the service long is shown by his still
wearing his ammunition boots, as they are called," observed
Mycroft.
  "He had not the cavalry stride, yet he wore his hat on one
side, as is shown by the lighter skin on that side of his brow. His
weight is against his being a sapper. He is in the artillery."
  "Then, of course, his complete mourning shows that he has
lost someone very dear. The fact that he is doing his own
shopping looks as though it were his wife. He has been buying
things for children, you perceive. There is a rattle, which shows
that one of them is very young. The wife probably died in
childbed. The fact that he has a picture-book under his arm
shows that there is another child to be thought of."
  I began to understand what my friend meant when he said that
his brother possessed even keener faculties than he did himself.
He glanced across at me and smiled. Mycroft took snuff from a
tortoise-shell box and brushed away the wandering grains from
his coat front with a large, red silk handkerchief.
  "By the way, Sherlock," said he, "I have had something
quite after your own heart -- a most singular problem -- submltted
to my judgment. I really had not the energy to follow it up save
in a very incomplete fashion, but it gave me a basis for some
pleasing speculations. If you would care to hear the facts --"
  "My dear Mycroft, I should be delighted."
  The brother scribbled a note upon a leaf of his pocket-book,
and, ringing the bell, he handed it to the waiter.
  "I have asked Mr. Melas to step across," said he. "He lodges
on the floor above me, and I have some slight acquaintance with
him, which led him to come to me in his perplexity. Mr. Melas
is a Greek by extraction, as I understand, and he is a remarkable
linguist. He earns his living partly as interpreter in the law courts
and partly by acting as guide to any wealthy Orientals who may
visit the Northumberland Avenue hotels. I think I will leave him
to tell his very remarkable experience in his own fashion."
  A few minutes later we were joined by a short, stout man
whose olive face and coal black hair proclaimed his Southern
origin, though his speech was that of an educated Englishman.
He shook hands eagerly with Sherlock Holmes, and his dark
eyes sparkled with pleasure when he understood that the special-
ist was anxious to hear his story.
  "I do not believe that the police credit me -- on my word, I do
not," said he in a wailing voice. "Just because they have never
heard of it before, they think that such a thing cannot be. But I
know that I shall never be easy in my mind until I know what
has become of my poor man with the sticking-plaster upon his
face."
  "I am all attention," said Sherlock Holmes.
  "This is Wednesday evening," said Mr. Melas. "Well, then,
it was Monday night -- only two days ago, you understand -- that
all this happened. I am an interpreter, as perhaps my neighbour
there has told you. I interpret all languages -- or nearly all -- but
as I am a Greek by birth and with a Grecian name, it is with that
particular tongue that I am principally associated. For many
years I have been the chief Greek interpreter in London, and my
name is very well known in the hotels.
  "It happens not unfrequently that I am sent for at strange
hours by foreigners who get into difficulties, or by travellers who
arrive late and wish my services. I was not surprised, therefore,
on Monday night when a Mr. Latimer, a very fashionably
dressed young man, came up to my rooms and asked me to
accompany him in a cab which was waiting at the door. A Greek
friend had come to see him upon business, he said, and as he
could speak nothing but his own tongue, the services of an
interpreter were indispensable. He gave me to understand that his
house was some little distance off, in Kensington, and he seemed
to be in a great hurry, bustling me rapidly into the cab when we
had descended to the street.
  "I say into the cab, but I soon became doubtful as to whether
tt was not a carriage in which I found myself. It was certainly
more roomy than the ordinary four-wheeled disgrace to London,
and the fittings, though frayed, were of rich quality. Mr. Latimer
seated himself opposite to me and we started off through Charing
Cross and up the Shaftesbury Avenue. We had come out upon
Oxford Street and I had ventured some remark as to this being a
roundabout way to Kensington, when my words were arrested by
the extraordinary conduct of my companion.
  "He began by drawing a most formidable-looking bludgeon
loaded with lead from his pocket, and switching it backward and
forward several times, as if to test its weight and strength. Then
he placed it without a word upon the seat beside him. Having
done this, he drew up the windows on each side, and I found to
my astonishment that they were covered with paper so as to
prevent my seeing through them.
  " 'I am sorry to cut off your view, Mr. Melas,' said he. 'The
fact is that I have no intention that you should see what the place
is to which we are driving. It might possibly be inconvenient to
me if you could find your way there again.'
  "As you can imagine, I was utterly taken aback by such an
address. My companion was a powerful, broad-shouldered young
fellow, and, apart from the weapon, I should not have had the
slightest chance in a struggle with him.
  " 'This is very extraordinary conduct, Mr. Latimer,' I stam-
mered. 'You must be aware that what you are doing is quite
illegal. '
  " 'It is somewhat of a liberty, no doubt,' said he, 'but we'll
make it up to you. I must warn you, however, Mr. Melas, that if
at any time to-night you attempt to raise an alarm or do anything
which is against my interest, you will find it a very serious thing.
I beg you to remember that no one knows where you are, and
that, whether you are in this carriage or in my house, you are
equally in my power.'
  "His words were quiet, but he had a rasping way of saying
them, which was very menacing. I sat in silence wondering what
on earth could be his reason for kidnapping me in this extraordi-
nary fashion. Whatever it might be, it was perfectly clear that
there was no possible use in my resisting, and that I could only
wait to see what might befall.
  "For nearly two hours we drove without my having the least
clue as to where we were going. Sometimes the rattle of the
stones told of a paved causeway, and at others our smooth, silent
course suggested asphalt; but, save by this variation in sound,
there was nothing at all which could in the remotest way help me
to form a guess as to where we were. The paper over each
window was impenetrable to light, and a blue curtain was drawn
across the glasswork in front. It was a quarter-past seven when
we left Pall Mall, and my watch showed me that it was ten
minutes to nine when we at last came to a standstill. My com-
panion let down the window, and I caught a glimpse of a low,
arched doorway with a lamp burning above it. As I was hurried
from the carriage it swung open, and I found myself inside the
house, with a vague impression of a lawn and trees on each side
of me as I entered. Whether these were private grounds, how-
ever, or bona-fide country was more than I could possibly ven-
ture to say.
  "There was a coloured gas-lamp inside which was turned so
low that I could see little save that the hall was of some size and
hung with pictures. In the dim light I could make out that the
person who had opened the door was a small, mean-looking,
middle-aged man with rounded shoulders. As he turned towards
us the glint of the light showed me that he was wearing glasses.
  " 'Is this Mr. Melas, Harold?' said he.
  " 'Yes.'
  " 'Well done, well done! No ill-will, Mr. Melas, I hope, but
we could not get on without you. If you deal fair with us you'll
not regret it, but if you try any tricks, God help you!' He spoke
in a nervous, jerky fashion, and with little giggling laughs in
between, but somehow he impressed me with fear more than the
other.
  " 'What do you want with me?' I asked.
  " 'Only to ask a few questions of a Greek gentleman who is
visiting us, and to let us have the answers. But say no more than
you are told to say, or --' here came the nervous giggle again --
'you had better never have been born.'
  "As he spoke he opened a door and showed the way into a
room which appeared to be very richly furnished, but again the
only light was afforded by a single lamp half-turned down. The
chamber was certainly large, and the way in which my feet sank
into the carpet as I stepped across it told me of its richness. I
caught glimpses of velvet chairs, a high white marble mantel-
piece, and what seemed to be a suit of Japanese armour at one
side of it. There was a chair just under the lamp, and the elderly
man motioned that I should sit in it. The younger had left us, but
he suddenly returned through another door, leading with him a
gentleman clad in some sort of loose dressing-gown who moved
slowly towards us. As he came into the circle of dim light which
enabled me to see him more clearly I was thrilled with horror at
his appearance. He was deadly pale and terribly emaciated, with
the protruding, brilliant eyes of a man whose spirit was greater
than his strength. But what shocked me more than any signs of
physical weakness was that his face was grotesquely criss-crossed
with sticking-plaster, and that one large pad of it was fastened
over his mouth.
  " 'Have you the slate, Harold?' cried the older man, as this
strange being fell rather than sat down into a chair. 'Are his
hands loose? Now, then, give him the pencil. You are to ask the
questions, Mr. Melas, and he will write the answers. Ask him
first of all whether he is prepared to sign the papers?"
  "The man's eyes flashed fire.
  " 'Never!' he wrote in Greek upon the slate.
  " 'On no conditions?' I asked at the bidding of our tyrant.
  " 'Only if I see her married in my presence by a Greek priest
whom I know.'
  "The man giggled in his venomous way.
  " 'You know what awaits you, then?'
  " 'I care nothing for myself.'
  "These are samples of the questions and answers which made
up our strange half-spoken, half-written conversation. Again and
again I had to ask him whether he would give in and sign the
documents. Again and again I had the same indignant reply. But
soon a happy thought came to me. I took to adding on little
sentences of my own to each question, innocent ones at first, to
test whether either of our companions knew anything of the
matter, and then, as I found that they showed no sign I played a
more dangerous game. Our conversation ran something like this:
  " 'You can do no good by this obstinacy. Who are you?'
  " 'I care not. I am a stranger in London.'
  " 'Your fate will be on your own head. How long have you
been here?'
  " 'Let it be so. Three weeks.'
  " 'The property can never be yours. What ails you?'
  " 'It shall not go to villains. They are starving me.'
  " 'You shall go free if you sign. What house is this?'
  " 'I will never sign. I do not know.'
  " 'You are not doing her any service. What is your name?'
  " 'Let me hear her say so. Kratides.'
  " 'You shall see her if you sign. Where are you from?'
  " 'Then I shall never see her. Athens.'
  "Another five minutes, Mr. Holmes, and I should have wormed
out the whole story under their very noses. My very next ques-
tion might have cleared the matter up, but at that instant the door
opened and a woman stepped into the room. I could not see her
clearly enough to know more than that she was tall and graceful,
with black hair, and clad in some sort of loose white gown.
  " 'Harold,' said she, speaking English with a broken accent.
'I could not stay away longer. It is so lonely up there with
only -- Oh, my God, it is Paul!'
  "These last words were in Greek, and at the same instant the
man with a convulsive effort tore the plaster from his lips, and
screaming out 'Sophy! Sophy!' rushed into the woman's arms.
Their embrace was but for an instant, however, for the younger
man seized the woman and pushed her out of the room, while the
elder easily overpowered his emaciated victim and dragged him
away through the other door. For a moment I was left alone in
the room, and I sprang to my feet with some vague idea that I
might in some way get a clue to what this house was in which I
found myself. Fortunately, however, I took no steps, for looking
up I saw that the older man was standing in the doorway, with
his eyes fixed upon me.
  " 'That will do, Mr. Melas,' said he. 'You perceive that we
have taken you into our confidence over some very private
business. We should not have troubled you, only that our friend
who speaks Greek and who began these negotiations has been
forced to return to the East. It was quite necessary for us to find
someone to take his place, and we were fortunate in hearing of
your powers.'
  "I bowed.
  " 'There are five sovereigns here,' said he, walking up to me,
'which will, I hope, be a sufficient fee. But remember,' he
added, tapping me lightly on the chest and giggling, 'if you
speak to a human soul about this -- one human soul, mind -- well,
may God have mercy upon your soul!'
  "I cannot tell you the loathing and horror with which this
insignificant-looking man inspired me. I could see him better
now as the lamp-light shone upon him. His features were peaky
and sallow, and his little pointed beard was thready and ill-
nourished. He pushed his face forward as he spoke and his lips
and eyelids were continually twitching like a man with St.
Vitus's dance. I could not help thinking that his strange, catchy
little laugh was also a symptom of some nervous malady. The
terror of his face lay in his eyes, however, steel gray, and
glistening coldly with a malignant, inexorable cruelty in their
depths.
  " 'We shall know if you speak of this,' said he. 'We have our
own means of information. Now you will find the carriage
waiting, and my friend will see you on your way.'
  "I was hurried through the hall and into the vehicle, again
obtaining that momentary glimpse of trees and a garden. Mr.
Latimer followed closely at my heels and took his place opposite
to me without a word. In silence we again drove for an intermi-
nable distance with the windows raised, until at last, just after
midnight, the carriage pulled up.
  " 'You will get down here, Mr. Melas,' said my companion.
'I am sorry to leave you so far from your house, but there is no
alternative. Any attempt upon your part to follow the carriage
can only end in injury to yourself.'
  "He opened the door as he spoke. and I had hardly time to
spring out when the coachman lashed the horse and the carriage
rattled away. I looked around me in astonishment. I was on some
sort of a heathy common mottled over with dark clumps of
furze-bushes. Far away stretched a line of houses, with a light
here and there in the upper windows. On the other side I saw the
red signal-lamps of a railway.
  "The carriage which had brought me was already out of sight.
I stood gazing round and wondering where on earth I might be,
when I saw someone coming towards me in the darkness. As he
came up to me I made out that he was a railway porter.
  " 'Can you tell me what place this is?' I asked.
  " 'Wandsworth Common,' said he.
  " 'Can I get a train into town?'
  " 'If you walk on a mile or so to Clapham Junction,' said he,
'you'll just be in time for the last to Victoria.'
  "So that was the end of my adventure, Mr. Holmes. I do not
know where I was, nor whom I spoke with, nor anything save
what I have told you. But I know that there is foul play going
on, and I want to help that unhappy man if I can. I told the
whole story to Mr. Mycroft Holmes next morning, and subse-
quently to the police."
  We all sat in silence for some little time after listening to this
extraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock looked across at his brother.
  "Any steps?" he asked.
  Mycroft picked up the Daily News, which was lying on the
side-table.

       "Anybody supplying any information as to the where-
     abouts of a Greek gentleman named Paul Kratides, from
     Athens, who is unable to speak English, will be rewarded.
     A similar reward paid to anyone giving information about a
     Greek lady whose first name is Sophy. X 2473.

  "That was in all the dailies. No answer."
  "How about the Greek legation?"
  "I have inquired. They know nothing."
  "A wire to the head of the Athens police, then?"
  "Sherlock has all the energy of the family," said Mycroft,
turning to me. "Well, you take the case up by all means and let
me know if you do any good."
  "Certainly," answered my friend, rising from his chair. "I'll
let you know, and Mr. Melas also. In the meantime, Mr. Melas,
I should certainly be on my guard if I were you, for of course
they must know through these advertisements that you have
betrayed them."
  As we walked home together, Holmes stopped at a telegraph
office and sent off several wires.
  "You see, Watson," he remarked, "our evening has been by
no means wasted. Some of my most interesting cases have come
to me in this way through Mycroft. The problem which we have
just listened to, although it can admit of but one explanation, has
still some distinguishing features."
  "You have hopes of solving it?"
  "Well, knowing as much as we do, it will be singular indeed
if we fail to discover the rest. You must yourself have formed
some theory which will explain the facts to which we have
listened."
  "In a vague way, yes."
  "What was your idea, then?"
  "It seemed to me to be obvious that this Greek girl had been
carried off by the young Englishman named Harold Latimer."
  "Carried off from where?"
  "Athens, perhaps."
  Sherlock Holmes shook his head. "This young man could not
talk a word of Greek. The lady could talk English fairly well.
Inference -- that she had been in England some little time, but he
had not been in Greece."
  "Well, then, we will presume that she had once come on a
visit to England, and that this Harold had persuaded her to fly
with him."
  "That is more probable."
  "Then the brother -- for that, I fancy, must be the relationship --
comes over from Greece to interfere. He imprudently puts him-
self into the power of the young man and his older associate.
They seize him and use violence towards him in order to make
him sign some papers to make over the girl's fortune of which
he may be trustee -- to them. This he refuses to do. In order to
negotiate with him they have to get an interpreter, and they pitch
upon this Mr. Melas, having used some other one before. The
girl is not told of the arrival of her brother and finds it out by the
merest accident."
  "Excellent, Watson!" cried Holmes. "I really fancy that you
are not far from the truth. You see that we hold all the cards, and
we have only to fear some sudden act of violence on their part. If
they give us time we must have them."
  "But how can we find where this house lies?"
  "Well, if our conjecture is correct and the girl's name is or
was Sophy Kratides, we should have no difficulty in tracing her.
That must be our main hope, for the brother is, of coursc, a
complete stranger. It is clear that some time has elapsed since
this Harold established these relations with the girl -- some weeks
at any rate -- since the brother in Greece has had time to hear of it
and come across. If they have been living in the same place
during this time, it is probable that we shall have some answer to
Mycroft's advertisement."
  We had reached our house in Baker Street while we had been
talking. Holmes ascended the stair first, and as he opened the
door of our room he gave a start of surprise. Looking over his
shoulder, I was equally astonished. His brother Mycroft was
sitting smoking in the armchair.
  "Come in, Sherlock! Come in, sir," said he blandly, smiling
at our surprised faces. "You don't expect such energy from me
do you, Sherlock? But somehow this case attracts me."
  "How did you get here?"
  "I passed you in a hansom."
  "There has been some new development?"
  "I had an answer to my advertisement."
  "Ah!"
  "Yes, it came within a few minutes of your leaving."
  "And to what effect?"
  Mycroft Holmes took out a sheet of paper.
  "Here it is," said he, "written with a J pen on royal cream
paper by a middle-aged man with a weak constitution.

     "Sir [he saysl:
       "In answer to your advertisement of to-day's date, I beg
    to inform you that I know the young lady in question very
    well. If you should care to call upon me I could give you
    some particulars as to her painful history. She is living at
    present at The Myrtles, Beckenham.
                                               "Yours faithfully,
                                                   "J. DAVENPORT.

  "He writes from Lower Brixton," said Mycroft Holmes. "Do
you not think that we might drive to him now, Sherlock, and
learn these particulars?"
  "My dear Mycroft, the brother's life is more valuable than the
sister's story. I think we should call at Scotland Yard for Inspec-
tor Gregson and go straight out to Beckenham. We know that a
man is being done to death, and every hour may be vital."
  "Better pick up Mr. Melas on our way," I suggested. "We
may need an interpreter."
  "Excellent," said Sherlock Holmes. "Send the boy for a
four-wheeler, and we shall be off at once." He opened the
table-drawer as he spoke, and I noticed that he slipped his
revolver into his pocket. "Yes," said he in answer to my glance,
"I should say, from what we have heard, that we are dealing
with a particularly dangerous gang."
  It was almost dark before we found ourselves in Pall Mall, at
the rooms of Mr. Melas. A gentleman had just called for him,
and he was gone.
  "Can you tell me where?" asked Mycroft Holmes.
  "I don't know, sir," answered the woman who had opened
the door; "I only know that he drove away with the gentleman in
a carriage."
  "Did the gentleman give a name?"
  "No, sir."
  "He wasn't a tall, handsome, dark young man?"
  "Oh, no, sir. He was a little gentleman, with glasses, thin in
the face, but very pleasant in his ways, for he was laughing all
the time that he was talking."
  "Come along!" cried Sherlock Holmes abruptly. "This grows
serious," he observed as we drove to Scotland Yard. "These
men have got hold of Melas again. He is a man of no physical
courage, as they are well aware from their experience the other
night.This villain was able to terrorize him the instant that he
got into his presence. No doubt they want his professional
services, but, having used him, they may be inclined to punish
him for what they will regard as his treachery."
  Our hope was that, by taking train, we might get to Beckenham
as soon as or sooner than the carriage. On reaching Scotland
Yard, however, it was more than an hour before we could get
Inspector Gregson and comply with the legal formalities which
would enable us to enter the house. It was a quarter to ten before
we reached London Bridge, and half past before the four of us
alighted on the Beckenham platform. A drive of half a mile
brought us to The Myrtles -- a large, dark house standing back
from the road in its own grounds. Here we dismissed our cab and
made our way up the drive togeter.
  "The windows are all dark," remarked the inspector. "The
house seems deserted."
  "Our birds are flown and the nest empty," said Holmes.
  "Why do you say so?"
  "A carriage heavily loaded with luggage has passed out dur-
ing the last hour."
  The inspector laughed. "I saw the wheel-tracks in the light of
the gate-lamp, but where does the luggage come in?"
  "You may have observed the same wheel-tracks going the
other way. But the outward-bound ones were very much
deeper -- so much so that we can say for a certainty that there
was a very considerable weiyht on the carriage."
  "You get a trifle beyond me there," said the inspector, shrug-
ging his shoulders. "It will not be an easy door to force, but we
will try if we cannot make someone hear us."
  He hammered loudly at the knocker and pulled at the bell, but
without any success. Holmes had slipped away, but he came
back in a few minutes.
  "I have a window open," said he.
  "It is a mercy that you are on the side of the force, and not
against it, Mr. Holmes," remarked the inspector as he noted the
clever way in which my friend had forced back the catch.
"Well, I think that under the circumstances we may enter with-
out an invitation."
  One after the other we made our way into a large apartment,
which was evidently that in which Mr. Melas had found himself.
The inspector had lit his lantern, and by its light we could see the
two doors, the curtain, the lamp, and the suit of Japanese mail as
he had described them. On the table lay two glasses, an empty
brandy-bottle, and the remains of a meal.
  "What is that?" asked Holmes suddenly.
  We all stood still and listened. A low moaning sound was
coming from somewhere over our heads. Holmes rushed to the
door and out into the hall. The dismal noise came from upstairs.
He dashed up, the inspector and I at his heels. while his brother
Mycroft followed as quickly as his great bulk would permit.
  Three doors faced us upon the second floor, and it was from
the central of these that the sinister sounds were issuing, sinking
sometimes into a dull mumble and rising again into a shrill
whine. It was locked, but the key had been left on the outside.
Holmes flung open the door and rushed in, but he was out again
in an instant, with his hand to his throat.
  "It's charcoal," he cried. "Give it time. It will clear."
  Peering in, we could see that the only light in the room came
from a dull blue flame which flickered from a small brass tripod
in the centre. It threw a livid unnatural circle upon the floor,
while in the shadows beyond we saw the vague loom of two
fiyures which crouched against the wall. From thc open door
there reeked a horrible poisonous exhalation which set us gasp-
ing and coughing. Holmes rushed to the top of the stairs to draw
in the fresh air, and then, dashing into the room, he threw up the
window and hurled the brazen tripod out into the garden.
  "We can enter in a minute," he gasped, darting out again.
"Where is a candle? I doubt if we could strike a match in that
atmosphere. Hold the light at the door and we shall get them out,
Mycroft, now!"
  With a rush we got to the poisoned men and dragged them out
into the well-lit hall. Both of them were blue-lipped and insensi-
ble, with swollen, congested faces and protruding eyes. Indeed,
so distorted were their features that, save for his black beard and
stout figure, we might have failed to recognize in one of them
the Greek interpreter who had parted from us only a few hours
before at the Diogenes Club. His hands and feet were securely
strapped together, and he bore over one eye the marks of a
violent blow. The other, who was secured in a similar fashion
was a tall man in the last stage of emaciation, with several strips
of sticking-plaster arranged in a grotesque pattern over his face.
He had ceased to moan as we laid him down, and a glance
showed me that for him at least our aid had come too late. Mr.
Melas, however, still lived, and in less than an hour, with the
aid of ammonia and brandy, I had the satisfaction of seeing him
open his eyes, and of knowing that my hand had drawn him back
from that dark valley in which all paths meet.
  It was a simple story which he had to tell, and one which did
but confirm our own deductions. His visitor, on entering his
rooms, had drawn a life-preserver from his sleeve, and had so
impressed him with the fear of instant and inevitable death that
he had kidnapped him for the second time. Indeed, it was almost
mesmeric, the effect which this giggling ruffian had produced
upon the unfortunate linguist, for he could not speak of him save
with trembling hands and a blanched cheek. He had been taken
swiftly to Beckenham, and had acted as interpreter in a second
interview, even more dramatic than the first, in which the two
Englishmen had menaced their prisoner with instant death if he
did not comply with their demands. Finally, finding him proof
against every threat, they had hurled him back into his prison
and after reproaching Melas with his treachery, which appeared
from the newspaper advertisement, they had stunned him with a
blow from a stick, and he remembered nothing more until he
found us bending over him.
  And this was the singular case of the Grecian Interpreter, the
explanation of which is still involved in some mystery. We were
able to find out, by communicating with the gentleman who had
answered the advertisement, that the unfortunate young lady
came of a wealthy Grecian family, and that she had been on a
visit to some friends in England. While there she had met a
young man named Harold Latimer, who had acquired an ascen-
dency over her and had eventually persuaded her to fly with him.
Her friends, shocked at the event, had contented themselves with
informing her brother at Athens, and had then washed their
hands of the matter. The brother, on his arrival in England, had
imprudently placed himself in the power of Latimer and of his
associate, whose name was Wilson Kemp -- a man of the foulest
antecedents. These two, finding that through his ignorance of the
language he was helpless in their hands, had kept him a prisoner,
and had endeavoured by cruelty and starvation to make him sign
away his own and his sister's property. They had kept him in the
house without the girl's knowledge, and the plaster over the
face had been for the purpose of making recognition difficult in
case she should ever catch a glimpse of him. Her feminine
perceptions, however, had instantly seen through the disguise
when, on the occasion of the interpreter's visit, she had seen him
for the first time. The poor girl, however, was herself a prisoner,
for there was no one about the house except the man who acted
as coachman, and his wife, both of whom were tools of the
conspirators. Finding that their secret was out, and that their
prisoner was not to be coerced, the two villains with the girl had
fled away at a few hours' notice from the furnished house which
they had hired, having first, as they thought, taken vengeance
both upon the man who had defied and the one who had betrayed
them.
  Months afterwards a curious newspaper cutting reached us
from Buda-Pesth. It told how two Englishmen who had been
travelling with a woman had met with a tragic end. They had
each been stabbed, it seems, and the Hungarian police were of
opinion that they had quarrelled and had inflicted mortal injuries
upon each other. Holmes, however, is, I fancy, of a different
way of thinking, and he holds to this day that, if one could
find the Grecian girl, one might learn how the wrongs of herself
and her brother came to be avenged.

================================
                        His Last Bow

              An Epilogue of Sherlock Holmes

  It was nine o'clock at night upon the second of August -- the most terrible
August in the history of the world. One might have thought already that
God's curse hung heavy over a degenerate world, for there was an awesome
hush and a feeling of vague expectancy in the sultry and stagnant air. The
sun had long set, but one blood-red gash like an open wound lay low in the
distant west. Above, the stars were shining brightly, and below, the lights of
the shipping glimmered in the bay. The two famous Germans stood beside
the stone parapet of the garden walk, with the long, low, heavily gabled
house behind them, and they looked down upon the broad sweep of the
beach at the foot of the great chalk cliff on which Von Bork, like some
wandering eagle, had perched himself four years before. They stood with
their heads close together, talking in low, confidential tones. From below the
two glowing ends of their cigars might have been the smouldering eyes of
some malignant fiend looking down in the darkness.
  A remarkable man this Von Bork -- a man who could hardly be matched
among all the devoted agents of the Kaiser. It was his talents which had
first recommended him for the English mission, the most important mission
of all, but since he had taken it over those talents had become more and
more manifest to the half-dozen people in the world who were really in
touch with the truth. One of these was his present companion, Baron Von
Herling, the chief secretary of the legation, whose huge lOO-horse-power
Benz car was blocking the country lane as it waited to waft its owner back
to London.
  "So far as I can judge the trend of events, you will probably be back in
Berlin within the week," the secretary was saying. "When you get there, my
dear Von Bork, I think you will be surprised at the welcome you will receive.
I happen to know what is thought in the highest quarters of your work in this
country." He was a huge man, the secretary, deep, broad, and tall, with a
slow, heavy fashion of speech which had been his main asset in his political
career.
  Von Bork laughed.
  "They are not very hard to deceive," he remarked. "A more docile, simple
folk could not be imagined."
  "I don't know about that," said the other thoughtfully. "They have strange
limits and one must learn to observe them. It is that surface simplicity of
theirs which makes a trap for the stranger. One's first impression is that
they are entirely soft. Then one comes suddenly upon something very hard,
and you know that you have reached the limit and must adapt yourself to
the fact. They have, for example, their insular conventions which simply
must be observed."
  "Meaning, 'good form' and that sort of thing?" Von Bork sighed as one who
had suffered much.
  "Meaning British prejudice in all its queer manifestations. As an example I
may quote one of my own worst blunders -- I can afford to talk of my
blunders, for you know my work well enough to be aware of my successes.
It was on my first arrival. I was invited to a week-end gathering at the
country house of a cabinet minister. The conversation was amazingly
indiscreet."
  Von Bork nodded. "I've been there," said he dryly.
  "Exactly. Well, I naturally sent a resume of the information to Berlin.
Unfortunately our good chancellor is a little heavy-handed in these matters,
and he transmitted a remark which showed that he was aware of what had
been said. This, of course, took the trail straight up to me. You've no idea
the harm that it did me. There was nothing soft about our British hosts on
that occasion, I can assure you. I was two years living it down. Now you, with
this sporting pose of yours --"
  "No, no, don't call it a pose. A pose is an artificial thing. This is quite
natural. I am a born sportsman. I enjoy it."
  "Well, that makes it the more effective. You yacht against them, you hunt
with them, you play polo, you match them in every game, your four-in-
hand takes the prize at Olympia. I have even heard that you go the length
of boxing with the young officers. What is the result? Nobody takes you
seriously. You are a 'good old sport,' 'quite a decent fellow for a German,'
a hard-drinking, night-club, knock-about-town, devil-may-care young fellow.
And all the time this quiet country house of yours is the centre of half the
mischief in England, and the sporting squire the most astute secret-service
man in Europe. Genius, my dear Von Bork?enius!"
  "You flatter me, Baron. But certainly I may claim that my four years in this
country have not been unproductive. I've never shown you my little store.
Would you mind stepping in for a moment?"
  The door of the study opened straight on to the terrace. Von Bork pushed it
back, and, leading the way, he clicked the switch of the electric light. He
then closed the door behind the bulky form which followed him and carefully
adjusted the heavy curtain over the latticed window. Only when all these
precautions had been taken and tested did he turn his sunburned aquiline
face to his guest.
  "Some of my papers have gone," said he. "When my wife and the household
left yesterday for Flushing they took the less important with them. I must, of
course, claim the protection of the embassy for the others."
  "Your name has already been filed as one of the personal suite. There will
be no difficulties for you or your baggage. Of course, it is just possible
that we may not have to go. England may leave France to her fate. We are sure
that there is no binding treaty between them."
  "And Belgium?"
  "Yes, and Belgium, too."
  Von Bork shook his head. "I don't see how that could be. There is a definite
treaty there. She could never recover from such a humiliation."
  "She would at least have peace for the moment."
  "But her honour?"
  "Tut, my dear sir, we live in a utilitarian age. Honour is a mediaeval
conception. Besides England is not ready. It is an inconceivable thing, but
even our special war tax of fifty million, which one would think made our
purpose as clear as if we had advertised it on the front page of the Times,
has not roused these people from their slumbers. Here and there one hears a
question. It is my business to find an answer. Here and there also there is an
irritation. It is my business to soothe it. But I can assure you that so far
as the essentials go -- the storage of munitions, the preparation for
submarine attack, the arrangements for making high explosives -- nothing is
prepared. How, then, can England come in, especially when we have stirred
her up such a devil's brew of Irish civil war, window-breaking Furies, and God
knows what to keep her thoughts at home."
  "She must think of her future."
  "Ah, that is another matter. I fancy that in the future we have our own very
definite plans about England, and that your information will be very vital to
us. It is to-day or to-morrow with Mr. John Bull. If he prefers to-day we are
perfectly ready. If it is to-morrow we shall be more ready still. I should
think they would be wiser to fight with allies than without them, but that is
their own affair. This week is their week of destiny. But you were speaking
of your papers." He sat in the armchair with the light shining upon his broad
bald head, while he puffed sedately at his cigar.
  The large oak-panelled, book-lined room had a curtain hung in the further
corner. When this was drawn it disclosed a large, brass-bound safe. Von Bork
detached a small key from his watch chain, and after some considerable
manipulation of the lock he swung open the heavy door.
  "Look!" said he, standing clear, with a wave of his hand.
  The light shone vividly into the opened safe, and the secretary of the
embassy gazed with an absorbed interest at the rows of stuffed pigeon-holes
with which it was furnished. Each pigeonhole had its label, and his eyes as he
glanced along them read a long series of such titles as "Fords," "Harbour-
defences," "Aeroplanes," "Ireland," "Egypt," "Portsmouth forts," "The
Channel," "Rosythe," and a score of others. Each compartment was bristling
with papers and plans.
  "Colossal!" said the secretary. Putting down his cigar he softly clapped
his fat hands.
  "And all in four years, Baron. Not such a bad show for the hard-drinking,
hard-riding country squire. But the gem of my collection is coming and there
is the setting all ready for it." He pointed to a space over which "Naval
Signals" was printed.
  "But you have a good dossier there already."
  "Out of date and waste paper. The Admiralty in some way got the alarm
and every code has been changed. It was a blow, Baron -- the worst setback in
my whole campaign. But thanks to my check-book and the good Altamont all will
be well to-night."
  The Baron looked at his watch and gave a guttural exclamation of
disappointment.
  "Well, I really can wait no longer. You can imagine that things are moving
at present in Carlton Terrace and that we have all to be at our posts. I
had hoped to be able to bring news of your great coup. Did Altamont
name no hour?"
  Von Bork pushed over a telegram.

        Will come without fail to-night and bring new sparking plugs.
                                                            ALTAMONT.

  "Sparking plugs, eh?"
  "You see he poses as a motor expert and I keep a full garage. In our
code everything likely to come up is named after some spare part. If he
talks of a radiator it is a battleship, of an oil pump a cruiser, and so on.
Sparking plugs are naval signals."
  "From Portsmouth at midday," said the secretary, examining the
superscription. "By the way, what do you give him?"
  "Five hundred pounds for this particular job. Of course he has a salary as
well."
  "The greedy rogue. They are useful, these traitors, but I grudge them
their blood money."
  "I grudge Altamont nothing. He is a wonderful worker. If I pay him well,
at least he delivers the goods, to use his own phrase. Besides he is not a
traitor. I assure you that our most pan-Germanic Junker is a sucking
dove in his feelings towards England as compared with a real bitter Irish-
American."
  "Oh, an Irish-American?"
  "If you heard him talk you would not doubt it. Sometimes I assure you I
can hardly understand him. He seems to have declared war on the King's
English as well as on the English king. Must you really go? He may be
here any moment."
  "No. I'm sorry, but I have already overstayed my time. We shall expect
you early to-morrow, and when you get that signal book through the
little door on the Duke of York's steps you can put a triumphant finis to
your record in England. What! Tokay!"
  He indicated a heavily sealed dust-covered bottle which stood with two high
glasses upon a salver.
  "May I offer you a glass before your journey?"
  "No, thanks. But it looks like revelry."
  "Altamont has a nice taste in wines, and he took a fancy to my Tokay. He is
a touchy fellow and needs humouring in small things. I have to study him, I
assure you." They had strolled out on to the terrace again, and along it to
the further end where at a touch from the Baron's chauffeur the great car
shivered and chuckled. "Those are the lights of Harwich, I suppose," said the
secretary, pulling on his dust coat. "How still and peaceful it all seems.
There may be other lights within the week, and the English coast a less
tranquil place! The heavens, too, may not be quite so peaceful if all that
the good Zeppelin promises us comes true. By the way, who is that?"
  Only one window showed a light behind them; in it there stood a lamp, and
beside it, seated at a table, was a dear old ruddy-faced woman in a country
cap. She was bending over her knitting and stopping occasionally to stroke a
large black cat upon a stool beside her.
  "That is Martha, the only servant I have left."
  The secretary chuckled.
  "She might almost personify Britannia," said he, "with her complete self-
absorption and general air of comfortable somnolence. Well, au revoir, Von
Bork!" With a final wave of his hand he sprang into the car, and a moment
later the two golden cones from the headlights shot forward through the
darkness. The secretary lay back in the cushions of the luxurious limousine,
with his thoughts so full of the impending European tragedy that he hardly
observed that as his car swung round the village street it nearly passed over
a little Ford coming in the opposite direction.
  Von Bork walked slowly back to the study when the last gleams of the motor
lamps had faded into the distance. As he passed he observed that his old
housekeeper had put out her lamp and retired. It was a new experience to
him, the silence and darkness of his widespread house, for his family and
household had been a large one. It was a relief to him, however, to think that
they were all in safety and that, but for that one old woman who had
lingered in the kitchen, he had the whole place to himself. There was a good
deal of tidying up to do inside his study and he set himself to do it until
his keen, handsome face was flushed with the heat of the burning papers. A
leather valise stood beside his table, and into this he began to pack very
neatly and systematically the precious contents of his safe. He had hardly
got started with the work, however, when his quick ears caught the sound of a
distant car. Instantly he gave an exclamation of satisfaction, strapped up
the valise, shut the safe, locked it, and hurried out on to the terrace. He
was just in time to see the lights of a small car come to a halt at the gate.
A passenger sprang out of it and advanced swiftly towards him, while the
chauffeur, a heavily built, elderly man with a gray moustache, settled down
like one who resigns himself to a long vigil.
  "Well?" asked Von Bork eagerly, running forward to meet his visitor.
  For answer the man waved a small brown-paper parcel triumphantly above
his head.
  "You can give me the glad hand to-night, mister," he cried. "I'm bringing
home the bacon at last."
  "The signals?"
  "Same as I said in my cable. Every last one of them, semaphore, lamp code,
Marconi -- a copy, mind you, not the original. That was too dangerous. But
it's the real goods, and you can lay to that." He slapped the German upon the
shoulder with a rough familiarity from which the other winced.
  "Come in," he said. "I'm all alone in the house. I was only waiting for
this. Of course a copy is better than the original. If an original were
missing they would change the whole thing. You think it's all safe about the
copy?"
  The Irish-American had entered the study and stretched his long limbs from
the armchair. He was a tall, gaunt man of sixty, with clear-cut features and a
small goatee beard which gave him a general resemblance to the caricatures
of Uncle Sam. A halfsmoked, sodden cigar hung from the corner of his mouth,
and as he sat down he struck a match and relit it. "Making ready for a
move?" he remarked as he looked round him. "Say, mister," he added, as his
eyes fell upon the safe from which the curtain was now removed, "you don't
tell me you keep your papers in that?"
  "Why not?"
  "Gosh, in a wide-open contraption like that! And they reckon you to be
some spy. Why, a Yankee crook would be into that with a can-
opener. If I'd known that any letter of mine was goin' to lie loose in a thing
like that I'd have been a mug to write to you at all."
  "It would puzzle any crook to force that safe," Von Bork answered. "You
won't cut that metal with any tool."
  "But the lock?"
  "No, it's a double combination lock. You know what that is?"
  "Search me," said the American.
  "Well, you need a word as well as a set of figures before you can get the
lock to work." He rose and showed a doubleradiating disc round the keyhole.
"This outer one is for the letters, thel inner one for the figures."
  "Well, well, that's fine."
  "So it's not quite as simple as you thought. It was four years ago that I
had it made, and what do you think I chose for the word and figures?"
  "It's beyond me."
  "Well, I chose August for the word, and 1914 for the figures, and here we
are."
  The American's face showed his surprise and admiration.
  "My, but that was smart! You had it down to a fine thing."
  "Yes, a few of us even then could have guessed the date. Here it is, and I'm
shutting down to-morrow morning. "
  "Well, I guess you'll have to fix me up also. I'm not staying in this gol-
darned country all on my lonesome. In a week or less, from what I see, John
Bull will be on his hind legs and fair ramping. I'd rather watch him from
over the water."
  "But you're an American citizen?"
  "Well, so was Jack James an American citizen, but he's doing time in
Portland all the same. It cuts no ice with a British copper to tell him
you're an American citizen. 'It's British law and order over here,' says he.
By the way, mister, talking of Jack James, it seems to me you don't do much
to cover your men."
  "What do you mean?" Von Bork asked sharply.
  "Well, you are their employer, ain't you? It's up to you to see that they
don't fall down. But they do fall down, and when did you ever pick them up?
There's James --"
  "It was James's own fault. You know that yourself. He was too self-willed
for the job."
  "James was a bonehead -- I give you that. Then there was Hollis. "
  "The man was mad."
  "Well, he went a bit woozy towards the end. It's enough to make a man
bughouse when he has to play a part from morning to night with a hundred
guys all ready to set the coppers wise to him. But now there is Steiner --"
  Von Bork started violently, and his ruddy face turned a shade paler.
  "What about Steiner?"
  "Well, they've got him, that's all. They raided his store last night, and
he and his papers are all in Portsmouth jail. You'll go off and he, poor
devil, will have to stand the racket, and lucky if he gets off with his life.
That's why I want to get over the water as soon as you do."
  Von Bork was a strong, self-contained man, but it was easy to see that the
news had shaken him.
  "How could they have got on to Steiner?" he muttered. "That's the worst blow
yet."
  "Well, you nearly had a worse one, for I believe they are not far off me."
  "You don't mean that!"
  "Sure thing. My landlady down Fratton way had some inquiries, and when I
heard of it I guessed it was time for me to hustle. But what I want to know,
mister, is how the coppers know these things? Steiner is the fifth man you've
lost since I signed on with you, and I know the name of the sixth if I don't
get a move on. How do you explain it, and ain't you ashamed to see your men
go down like this?"
  Von Bork flushed crimson.
  "How dare you speak in such a way!"
  "If I didn't dare things, mister, I wouldn't be in your service. But I'll
tell you straight what is in my mind. I've heard that with you German
politicians when an agent has done his work you are not sorry to see him put
away."
  Von Bork sprang to his feet.
  "Do you dare to suggest that I have given away my own agents!"
  "I don't stand for that, mister, but there's a stool pigeon or a cross
somewhere, and it's up to you to find out where it is. Anyhow I am taking no
more chances. It's me for little Holland, and the sooner the better."
  Von Bork had mastered his anger.
  "We have been allies too long to quarrel now at the very hour of victory,"
he said. "You've done splendid work and taken risks, and I can't forget it. By
all means go to Holland, and you can get a boat from Rotterdam to New York.
No other line will be safe a week from now. I'll take that book and pack it
with the rest."
  The American held the small parcel in his hand, but made no motion to give
it up.
  "What about the dough?" he asked.
  "The what?"
  "The boodle. The reward. The 500 pounds. The gunner turned damned nasty at
the last, and I had to square him with an extra hundred dollars or it would
have been nitsky for you and me. 'Nothin' doin'!' says he, and he meant it,
too, but the last hundred did it. It's cost me two hundred pound from first
to last, so it isn't likely I'd give it up without gettin' my wad. "
  Von Bork smiled with some bitterness. "You don't seem to have a very high
opinion of my honour," said he, "you want the money before you give up the
book."
  "Well, mister, it is a business proposition."
  "All right. Have your way." He sat down at the table and scribbled a check,
which he tore from the book, but he refrained from handing it to his
companion. "After all, since we are to be on such terms, Mr. Altamont," said
he, "I don't see why I should trust you any more than you trust me. Do you
understand?" he added, looking back over his shoulder at the American.
"There's the check upon the table. I claim the right to examine that parcel
before you pick the money up."
  The American passed it over without a word. Von Bork undid a winding of
string and two wrappers of paper. Then he sat gazing for a moment in silent
amazement at a small blue book which lay before him. Across the cover was
printed in golden letters Practical Handbook of Bee Culture. Only for one
instant did the master spy glare at this strangely irrelevant inscription. The
next he was gripped at the back of his neck by a grasp of iron, and a
chloroformed sponge was held in front of his writhing face.
  "Another glass, Watson!" said Mr. Sherlock Holmes as he extended the bottle
of Imperial Tokay.
  The thickset chauffeur, who had seated himself by the table pushed
forward his glass with some eagerness.
  "It is a good wine, Holmes."
  "A remarkable wine, Watson. Our friend upon the sofa has assured me
that it is from Franz Josef's special cellar at the Schoenbrunn Palace.
Might I trouble you to open the window for chloroform vapour does not
help the palate."
  The safe was ajar, and Holmes standing in front of it was removing
dossier after dossier, swiftly examining each, and then packing it neatly
in Von Bork's valise. The German lay upon the sofa sleeping stertorously
with a strap round his upper arms and another round his legs.
"We need not hurry ourselves, Watson. We are safe from interruption.
Would you mind touching the bell? There is no one in the house except
old Martha, who has played her part to admiration. I got her the situation
here when first I took the matter up. Ah, Martha, you will be glad to hear
that all is well."
  The pleasant old lady had appeared in the doorway. She curtseyed with a
smile to Mr. Holmes, but glanced with some apprehension at the figure
upon the sofa.
  "It is all right, Martha. He has not been hurt at all."
  "I am glad of that, Mr. Holmes. According to his lights he has been a kind
master. He wanted me to go with his wife to Germany yesterday, but
that would hardly have suited your plans, would it, sir?"
  "No, indeed, Martha. So long as you were here I was easy in my mind. We
waited some time for your signal to-night."
  "It was the secretary, sir."
  "I know. His car passed ours."
  "I thought he would never go. I knew that it would not suit your plans,
sir, to find him here."
  "No, indeed. Well, it only meant that we waited half an hour or so until I
saw your lamp go out and knew that the coast was clear. You can report
to me to-morrow in London, Martha, at Claridge's Hotel."
  "Very good, sir."
  "I suppose you have everything ready to leave."
  "Yes, sir. He posted seven letters to-day. I have the addresses as usual."
  "Very good, Martha. I will look into them to-morrow. Good-
night. These papers," he continued as the old lady vanished, "are not of
very great imponance, for, of course, the information which they represent
has been sent off long ago to the German government. These are the
originals which could not safely be got out of the country."
  "Then they are of no use."
  "I should not go so far as to say that, Watson. They will at least show our
people what is known and what is not. I may say that a good many of
these papers have come tbrough me, and I need not add are thoroughly
untrustworthy. It would brighten my declining years to see a German
cruiser navigating the Solent according to the mine-field plans which I
have furnished. But you, Watson" -- he stopped his work and took his old
friend by the shoulders -- "I've hardly seen you in the light yet. How have
the years used you? You look the same blithe boy as ever. "
  "I feel twenty years younger, Holmes. I have seldom felt so happy as when
I got your wire asking me to meet you at Harwich with the car. But you,
Holmes -- you have changed very little --  save for that horrible goatee."
  "These are the sacrifices one makes for one's country, Watson," said
Holmes, pulling at his little tuft. "To-morrow it will be but a dreadful
memory. With my hair cut and a few other superficial changes I shall no
doubt reappear at Claridge's tomorrow as I was before this American
stunt -- I beg your pardon, Watson, my well of English seems to be
permanently defiled --  before this American job came my way."
  "But you have retired, Holmes. We heard of you as living the life of a
hermit among your bees and your books in a small farm upon the South
Downs."
  "Exactly, Watson. Here is the fruit of my leisured ease, the magnum opus of
my latter years!" He picked up the volume from the table and read out the
whole title, Practical Handbook of Bee Culture, with Some Observations
upon the Segregation of the Queen. "Alone I did it. Behold the fruit of
pensive nights and laborious days when I watched the little working gangs
as once I watched the criminal world of London."
  "But how did you get to work again?"
  "Ah, I have often marvelled at it myself. The Foreign Minister alone I could
have withstood, but when the Premier also deigned to visit my humble
roof! The fact is, Watson, that this gentleman upon the sofa was a bit too
good for our people. He was in a class by himself. Things were going wrong,
and no one could understand why they were going wrong. Agents were suspected
or even caught, but there was evidence of some strong and secret central
force. It was absolutely necessary to expose it. Strong pressure was brought
upon me to look into the matter. It has cost me two years, Watson, but they
have not been devoid of excitement. When I say that I started my pilgrimage
at Chicago, graduated in an Irish secret society at Buffalo, gave serious
trouble to the constabulary at Skibbareen, and so eventually caught the eye
of a subordinate agent of Von Bork, who recommended me as a likely man, you
will realize that the matter was complex. Since then I have been honoured by
his confidence, which has not prevented most of his plans going subtly wrong
and five of his best agents being in prison. I watched them, Watson, and I
picked them as they ripened. Well, sir, I hope that you are none the worse!"
  The last remark was addressed to Von Bork himself, who after much
gasping and blinking had lain quietly listening to Holmes's statement. He
broke out now into a furious stream of German invective, his face convulsed
with passion. Holmes continued his swift investigation of documents while
his prisoner cursed and swore.
  "Though unmusical, German is the most expressive of all languages," he
observed when Von Bork had stopped from pure exhaustion. "Hullo! Hullo!"
he added as he looked hard at the corner of a tracing before putting it in the
box. "This should put another bird in the cage. I had no idea that the
paymaster was such a rascal, though I have long had an eye upon him.
Mister Von Bork, you have a great deal to answer for."
  The prisoner had raised himself with some difficulty upon the sofa and was
staring with a strange mixture of amazement and hatred at his captor.
I shall get level with you, Altamont," he said, speaking with slow
deliberation. "If it takes me all my life I shall get level with you!"
  "The old sweet song," said Holmes. "How often have I heard it in days gone
by. It was a favourite ditty of the late lamented Professor Moriarty. Colonel
Sebastian Moran has also been known to warble it. And yet I live and keep
bees upon the South Downs."
  "Curse you, you double traitor!" cried the German, straining against his
bonds and glaring murder from his furious eyes.
  "No, no, it is not so bad as that," said Holmes, smiling. "As my speech
surely shows you, Mr. Altamont af Chicago had no existence in fact. I used
him and he is gone."
  "Then who are you?"
  "It is really immaterial who I am, but since the matter seems to interest
you, Mr. Von Bork, I may say that this is not my first acquaintance with the
members of your family. I have done a good deal of business in Germany in
the past and my name is probably familiar to you."
  "I would wish to know it," said the Prussian grimly.
  "It was I who brought about the separation between Irene Adler and the late
King of Bohemia when yorur cousin Heinrich was the Imperial Envoy. It was I
also who saved from murder, by the Nihilist Klopman, Count Von und Zu
Grafenstein, who was your mother's elder brother. It was I --"
  Von Bork sat up in amazement.
  "There is only one man," he cried.
  "Exactly," said Holmes.
  Von Bork groaned and sank back on the sofa. "And most of that information
came through you," he cried. "What is it worth? What have I done? It is my
ruin forever!"
  "It is certainly a little untrustworthy," said Holmes. "It will require some
checking and you have little time to check it. Your admiral may find the new
guns rather larger than he expects, and the cruisers perhaps a trifle faster."
  Von Bork clutched at his own throat in despair.
  "There are a good many other points of defail which will, no doubt, come to
light in good time. But youl have one quality which is very rare in a German,
Mr. Von Bork: you are a sportsman and you will bear me no ill-will when you
realize that you, who have outwitted so many other people, have at last been
outwitted yourself. After all, you have done vour best for your country, and I
have done my best for mine, and what could be more natural? Besides," he
added, not unkindly, as he laid his hand upon the shoulder of the prostrate
man, "it is better than to fall before some more ignoble foe. These papers are
now ready. Watson. If you will help me with our prisoner, I think that we
may get started for London at once."
  It was no easy task to move Von Bork, for he was a strong and a desperate
man. Finally, holding either arm, the two friends walked him very slowly down
the garden walk which he had trod with such proud confidence when he
received the congratulations of the famous diplomatist only a few hours
before. After a short, final struggle he was hoisted, still bound hand and
foot, into the spare seat of the little car. His precious valise was wedged
in beside him.
  "I trust that you are as comfortable as circumstances permit," said Holmes
when the final arrangements were made. "Should I be guilty of a liberty if I
lit a cigar and placed it between your lips?"
  But all amenities were wasted upon the angry German.
  "I suppose you realize, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said he, "that if your
government bears you out in this treatment it becomes an act of war."
  "What about your government and all this treatment?" said Holmes, tapping
the valise.
  "You are a private individual. You have no warrant for my arrest. The whole
proceeding is absolutely illegal and outrageous."
  "Absolutely," said Holmes.
  "Kidnapping a German subject."
  "And stealing his private papers."
  "Well, you realize your position, you and your accomplice here. If I were to
shout for help as we pass through the village --"
  "My dear sir, if you did anything so foolish you would probably enlarge the
two limited titles of our village inns by giving us 'The Dangling Prussian'
as a signpost. The Englishman is a patient creature, but at present his
temper is a little inflamed, and it would be as well not to try him too far.
No, Mr. Von Bork, you will go with us in a quiet, sensible fashion to
Scotland Yard, whence you can send for your friend, Baron Von Herling, and
see if even now you may not fill that place which he has reserved for you in
the ambassadorial suite. As to you, Watson, you are joining us with your old
service, as I understand, so London won't be out of your way. Stand with me
here upon the terrace, for it may be the last quiet talk that we shall ever
have."
  The two friends chatted in intimate converse for a few minutes, recalling
once again the days of the past, while their prisoner vainly wriggled to undo
the bonds that held him. As they turned to the car Holmes pointed back to the
moonlit sea and shook a thoughtful head.
  "There's an east wind coming, Watson."
  "l think not, Holmes. It is very warm."
  "Good old Watson! You are the one fixed point in a changing age. There's an
east wind coming all the same, such a wind as never blew on England yet. It
will be cold and bitter, Watson and a good many of us may wither before its
blast. But it's God's own wind none the less, and a cleaner, better, stronger
land will lie in the sunshine when the storm has cleared. Start her up,
Watson, for it's time that we were on our way. I have a check for five
hundred pounds which should be cashed early, for the drawer is quite
capable of stopping it if he can."

==============================
