Introduction to Non Cartesian Cogito
Kojin Karatani




--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The problematics of the Cartesian subject cannot be accessed without consideration of its relation with post-Copernican science. In modern science, recognition is not achieved directly from experience, or by a general conceptualization of it, but by a method that first establishes a "subjective" hypothesis-even if counter to experience-and then experiments based upon the hypothesis; and the result is always examined in the context of seeking a consensus with others. It is never an ultimate truth, but rather a "drive" that continues to expand as it is constantly being corrected. This is what Kant ultimately meant by the term "Copernican turn." And it was this subjectivity motivating the drive that Descartes as well as the post-Cartesian modern philosophers problematized. This subjectivity is totally different from, and often confused with, the one that always existed previously and was customarily called spirit, heart, or Self-what should be defined as the "psychological self": the distinction is that post-Cartesian subjectivity should assume an active stance of seeing the world, namely, by bracketing empirical self-evidence. 
There are several questions concerning this subjectivity. First, this active movement-subjectivity-tends to be confused with some positive agent or "being." This is precisely what happened in the interpretation of Descartes and his cogito. Second, once such a scientific hypothesis happens to be proven, its original status of being a subjective "invention" is forgotten, and it comes to be thought of as a discovery of the object itself. It is here that empiricism and positivism enter the scene. Needless to say, it was Kant who first criticized these two types of fallacy. He calls the work of this activity "transcendental subject," with the caveat that it should not be confused with any particular being. On the other hand, he maintains that what we call experience is already a composite of certain forms or categories, and distinguishes this composite-that which he defines as "phenomena"-from the object itself, namely, the "thing-in-itself." 
If we think of such a critical schematism of Kant, out of his own epistemology, we immediately notice that contemporary philosophy, too, "repeats" it in various manifestations. The first instance to note is that the problematic of modern science posed by Descartes and Kant should not be partitioned into "natural and cultural sciences" as the Neo-Kantians did. This categorization causes us to fall into the dualism of objective and subjective domains. Modern science-whatever its object-is rooted in the active drive, the kind for which there is no other name but transcendental subjectivity. In fact, it is symptomatic that most of the valid critics of the Cartesian subject have turned out to be those who have managed to introduce new sciences. To name one of them, Levi-Strauss discovered sameness in heterogeneous kinship structures (under the influence of the contemporary mathematics he had learned from Andre Weil, a member of the Bourbaki group) by tentatively constructing a transformation group. This method marked a striking contrast to functionalist anthropology that interpreted kinship structures as they appear to be-manifold and confused empirically. Notwithstanding Levi-Strauss's praise of Rousseau's empathy toward the other while attacking Descartes, his method is closer to Descartes's than to Rousseau's. Or to say it in reverse, Cartesian cogito was from the beginning an "anthropological cogito" (as James Clifford claimed), considering that in Discourses on Method Descartes detected reason in those same primitive societies which Westerners had determined to be irrational. Furthermore, Levi-Strauss's method, that begins from a mathematical hypothesis at the expense of the empirical given, has transcendental subjectivity as its premise, whatever he himself had to say about it. 
The Kantian categories of sensitivity, understanding, and reason are "works" that are discovered transcendentally, thus they are not beings in the strict sense. They are rather like the "unconscious" functioning-in-process; Kant's critique reveals that both empiricism and rationalism take for granted only the result/effect of the process. Freud says: "we call a psychical process unconscious whose existence we are obliged to assume-for some reason at that which we infer it from its effects-, but of which we know nothing" (88). In contradistinction to empirical psychology, Freud called his psychoanalysis meta-psychology, which in this context should be deemed equal to transcendental psychology. After psychoanalysis fell prey to empirical psychology on the one hand or Jungian metaphysics on the other, it was Lacan who made the point that Freudian meta-psychology was a "transcendental psychology." It was no accident that Lacan's so-called Borromean Knot-the real, the symbolic, and the imaginary-corresponds to Kant's sensibility, understanding, reason, or thing-in-itself, phenomenon, semblance-in-itself. It should also not be forgotten that Freud persisted in regarding psychoanalysis as a science, and continued to pose hypotheses to revise his theories. Freud certainly did consider that the psychological self appears as a result of the overdetermination of the "work" of the unconscious, while psychoanalysis presupposes "transcendental subjectivity" primarily as such an active function. 
The same thing can be said of Marx, who, in his critique of the discourse of classical economics (the domain of empiricism and rationalism), attempted to illuminate the structure (work) hidden there: and of Nietzsche, who attempted to reveal that what consciousness takes as cause is already an effect, and analyzed various grammars of the retrospective inversion. Attacking the Cartesian subject, they both "repeat" the subjectivity introduced by Descartes, but without ever speaking of it; for the subjectivity would have fallen again into the category of being had it been spoken of. Indeed, even Kant's transcendental subject and what Freud called Es begin to seem like just other subjects as soon as they are named positively. To repeat, the transcendental subject is entirely an activity-a work, therefore it cannot assume the position of an object or a being. To use Heidegger's term, this is Being as distinguished from beings. Being exists only as a work, or, more to the point, the work of nothingness. It was not necessarily modern subjectivity itself that Heidegger's ontology denied, but it targeted the kind of thought that mistakes such subjectivity as being. As he himself admits, Heidegger attempted to repeat the Kantian transcendental critique. In other words, he too was seriously involved in the problematic that appeared at the advent of modern science, that of Being as subjectivity. However, his invocation of the ancient Pre-Socratic thinkers with respect to the origin of Being was nothing but a Romanticist perspectival perversion. The lesson is that we can never escape from the problematic of subjectivity initiated in modern science. The only thing that can and should be done is to criticize various forms of deception: namely, the idea that we can get out of it by way of some more original or natural way of thinking. 
There have been attempts to discover ways to get out of the domain of modern subjectivity by looking to Oriental philosophy. They, too, are deceptive. It is true that in Asia there are many techniques or logics to extinguish the psychological self; however, they have nothing to do with the problematic of subjectivity initiated in modern science. Nishida Kitaro, who is often admired as the true heir of Oriental philosophy, was in fact one of the thinkers who intended to pursue the philosophical problems derived from Descartes and Kant by and within their own epistemologies. In his philosophical writings, he neither mentioned Zen nor used its terminology, though he was a Zen disciple. It is only a Romanticist daydream to look to Nishida for possibilities of a true, non-Western thinking.
In his attempt to ground the methodology of modern science-hypothesis first and experimentation to follow, while bracketing experience-Descartes encountered an enigma: why and how can recognition achieved by subjective activity be pertinent to nature/object? As a guarantor of this leap of faith, Descartes resorted to God as the creator of nature, that is, to the existential proof of God. Of course this was a paralogism, as Kant claimed, but the enigma itself persists. Kant located the enigma-that the subjective hypothesis becomes pertinent to nature-in the context of the "regulative Idee," which is posed in contradistinction to the "constitutive Idee." Therefore, it is a serious mistake (and has often led to dangerous results) to turn such an expectation into a constitutive principle, though it is something without which we cannot face the world.
Contemporary philosophers of science reject "subjectivity" and maintain that scientific truth exists only temporarily as it is constituted by agreements within shifting paradigms. Aside from the fact that this formulation is only a metamorphosis of Kant's concept- that phenomena are composed by forms and categories into which subjectivity is already thrown-, there is one crucial omission: that is, an awareness of the enigma that experimental scientists should inherently all have in common. Vanguard physics, that elaborates mathematical hypotheses of matters in which experiment is almost impossible, inevitably reminds us of what Kant called "theoretical faith." Today's philosophers of science (theoreticians as opposed to experimental scientists) avoid this essential enigma, persuading themselves that they have managed to terminate metaphysics by their indifference to it. Similarly, neither can the "linguistic turn," that privileges language instead of the subject, extinguish the problematic of subjectivity. The problematic of language itself cannot subsume that of subjectivity. For what Kant calls forms of sensitivity or categories of understanding already assume the "work" of language-that which is only discovered transcendentally by the active subjectivity. 
Why can what the subject composes possibly be pertinent to the objective world? It is often misleading to formulate this Cartesian enigma as the "subject/object split," for it is easily confused with the conventional "mind/body" question. In the case of Kant, he emphasizes the activity of subjectivity, while at the same time stressing its passivity. In other words, he insists that the subject that composes the world simultaneously exists passively within the same world. Undoubtedly, it was Spinoza who first made this point. He posits the Cartesian subject in the equation of world/nature/God. According to him, the anthropomorphized God and the freedom of will are only imaginary constructs derived from the passivity of being-in-the world, but his world/nature/God is also nothing more than a rationally reduced attribute. Thus, denying these "metaphysics" of Descartes and Spinoza, Kant grasps the activity and passivity of subject as the polarity of sensibility and understanding. It follows that the simultaneous split and synthesis of the polarity becomes problematic. It was also the coexistence of the activity of subjectivity and the passivity of "being-in-the world," in this precise sense that Heidegger cared about. How are the activity and the passivity synthesized? Or, how is this Being as subjectivity connected to Being as nature?
In Romanticism their unity came to be taken as original. The mediating imagination of the "intellectual intuition," in the sense of Schelling, is placed in the gap between sensibility and understanding. Hereafter philosophy was aestheticized. Although it was clearly Kant who motivated the aestheticization of philosophy, he himself maintained that the synthesis was simply imaginary (ideative). This is to say, even though the synthetic judgment-the synthesis of sensibility and understanding or of passivity and activity-seems to be established ex post facto, it actually contains a certain fatal leap (salto mortale)-that which Kierkegaard called "qualitative dialectics." Post-Kantian romantics were recaptured by metaphysics precisely by presupposingthe synthesis a priori. In Heidegger's case, though he invoked synthetic "original imagination," he should be distinguished from the Romantics in that he detected an equivalent of the Kierkegaardian leap with respect to the subject/object accord. 
To repeat, stressing the activity of subject cannot be separated from stressing its passivity. Looking at it from a different angle, this is to say that we who actively grasp the world passively belong to the "world." The same thing can be said with respect to history. We are constantly composing history while belonging to history as the thing-in-itself, and thus cannot go beyond such a "conjuncture." Although from the ex post facto view any and all discernments seem to be possible, one is blind at the very instant, precisely as Hegel was. As Paul de Man would say, our discernment is possible only in our blindness. Inasmuch as we can never stand at an absolute end, absolute knowledge-or subject/object oneness-can have only the status of a regulative Idee. 
Reflecting on the above details, one realizes that the problematic of subjectivity discovered by Descartes is not dissolved by denying Descartes. This is the very given condition of our modern times. And again, we should not confuse subjectivity with the psychological self, even though there is a certain inevitability in the confusion: the transcendental subjectivity is essentially a "work of nothingness," but, as soon as the work is acknowledged, "nothingness" immediately turns into the subject itself (in both the grammatical and epistemological senses). When this happens, however, one always has to return to the empirical subject, instead of being involved in that esoteric attribute, the metaphysics of nothingness.
In the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant questions, ex post facto and introspectively, the transcendental conditions under which recognition (synthesis) happens to be established in reality. In the final analysis, however, it is evident that actual scientific recognition cannot be reached by one particular subject but by competition and agreement between many subjects. Later, in the Critique of Judgment, Kant made the point that though the judgment of taste must be universal, no individual subject can claim privilege to being universal. The criteria of being universal can only be achieved via "common sense" and accord that are fostered historically. And this condition is not limited to the domain of taste but pertinent to scientific recognition in general. But this is not to say that there was a linear transformation or evolution from Critique of Pure Reason to Critique of Judgment. For instance, applying the epistemology of Saussure, the former can be deemed a synchronic reflection on langue, while the latter can be considered a diachronic reflection on parole. It becomes clear that both are simultaneously and structurally indispensable in their own right. In the first place, the Kantian critique originated in art criticism, in which no single criterion can assume the status of a doxa. In this sense, the Critique of Pure Reason already contained the issue of manifold subjects and universality. And in fact Hannah Arendt attempted to read the Critique of Judgment as a foundation for political philosophy, reflecting that scientific recognition, too, is political in essence. Seen in this manner, I believe that arguments in today's philosophy of science are not necessarily beyond those in the Critique of Judgment. If we interpret Kant's "common sense" as paradigm and "genius" as those who propose non-prescriptive theories, this follows automatically. 
To accuse Descartes of being a solipsist is absurd, given that it was precisely Descartes who first attempted to ground the "Copernican turn"-the precedence of mathematical hypothesis over experience-in the context of philosophy, and in an age when Galileo was convicted by the Inquisition. He was thinking from a position in which "agreement" by itself cannot assume any power to determine truth-value. Descartes's subjectivity is nothing if not a singular one, which constantly makes departures from the community of agreement and thus cannot be encoded in a common language. What the singular subjectivity ultimately signifies is a "calling" to other subjectivities that are also deviating from communities. That is to say, Descartes's Discourses on Method was a "social" call for the agreement of the other. In order to read Descartes properly, one has to get out of the present community (paradigm) of reading him, and imagine the time when modern science was still a "drive," just as Freudian psychoanalysis was. 
It is today's paradigm to attack Descartes and Kant as the philosophers of subjectivity. In the non-Western sphere of Japan, I am also surrounded by critiques of Descartes (or rather the sum of Western philosophy) in a different sense. But these critiques are also constituted within the domain of modern epistemology and social form of being, and are not necessarily attributable to their Japaneseness or Oriental tradition of thought. They, too, assume a type of romantic daydream to escape from modern subjectivity. Inasmuch as the West fabricates its identity, non-Western worlds under Western domination fabricate their own. And it is especially crucial to deconstruct the discourses which are fabricated at the cross-section of their mutual reflections. One has to dare to stand in a position to see the difference that is suppressed by these identifications and their contradictions. Such a choice is cogito ergo sum, or the repetition of difference.

April 1996

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Works Cited

Freud, Sigmund. New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis. Trans. and ed. James Strachey. New York & London: Norton, 1964.

Lacan, Jacques. "R.S.I." in Le Seminaires de Jacques Lacan, Vol. XXII. Ed. Jacques-Alain Miller. Paris: Seuil, 1974-5.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------





Return home



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------










