
  < 노스트라다무스 예언서 05 >
==================================

 이 글은 확실하게 번역된 것이 아니므로 공개의 목적에는 사용할 수 없습니다. 단지 개인적인 이해의 정도로만 사용하시길 바랍니다. 사실 이 글
의 많은 부분이 제가 해석하기가 어려웠고, 또한 이글에서 사용되는 프랑스어 원문을 영어로 번역하는 과정에도 방언의 완전한 해석이나 문장 배열이 불완전함으로 인하여 완벽하지 못합니다. 단지 어느 정도 영문을 읽을 수 있는 사람을 위해 이 원문이 작성되었음을 알려드립니다. 저자는 확실하지 않습니다. 알아내는대로 이곳에 그의 인터넷 페이지 주소와 출처를 기재하겠습니다.


CHAPTER V





{{{{PART I:
}}
}} The victory, the crown, and the title Victor(?) bestowed upon the King of France.
           승리, 왕관(절정), 그리고 성직 취임자격 승리자는 프랑스의 왕에게 수여된다.
{{{{PART II:
}}
}} The Hosanna of the Church or the Golden period of peace.
           교회의 하나님을 찬송하는 외침 또는 평화의 전성 기간

PART I:

IV.34 King Henry of France shall be victorious.
      프랑스의 왕 헨리는 승리를 거두게 되리라.

Le grand mene catif d'estrange terre
D'or enchaine au Roy Chyren offert
Qui dans Ausonne, Milan perdra la querre
Et tout son ost mis a feu et a fer

NOTE:
Mene (menr): to guide, lead; terre: land; or: gold; enchaine: chained; Chyren: the anagram of Henryc, the Great King of France; offert: offered; Ausonne: ancient Bordeaux; Milan: Italian city; perdra (perir): to be be ruined, lost; guerre: war; ost: army, camp; feu: fire; fer: iron, sword.

The great leader captive in a foreign land
외국 땅에서 사로잡힌 위대한 지도자는
Chained in gold presented to King Henry
헨리 왕에게 선물을 증정함으로 속박되었다
Who resides in Bordeaux, Milan perished by war
(헨리 왕은) Bordeaux에 거주하고, Milan(밀라노)는 전쟁으로 멸망하게 된다.
And all his army shall be subjected to fire and sword
그리고 모든 그의 군대는 불과 칼로 지배받게 되리라

COMMENT: The leader of the Eastern Alliance, probably an Iranian shall be captured. King Henry of France shall become the Victor and he shall come from Bordeaux.

III.37 Henri shall pray at Mass before the assault or decisive battle. 
      헨리(Henri)는 급습또는 중대한 전쟁 이전에 미사에서 기도하게 되리라.
      Americans shall capture Milan.
      미국인들은 밀라노를 점령할 것이다.

Avant l'assaut l'oraison prononcee
Milan pris d'Aigle par embusches deceus
Muraille antique par cannons enfoncee
Par feu et sang a mercy peu receus

NOTE:
Avant: before; oraison: speech, prayer; pris:taken; Aigle: eagle or USA; embusche: ambusg; deceu: deceived; muraille: wall, partition; enfoncee (enfoncer): to push down, thrust; peu: few, little; receu: received.

Before the assault, the prayer shall be pronounced
급습 전에, 기도는 음독(音讀)될 것이다
Milan taken by Americans through a deceived ambush
밀라노는 복병에 속아서 미국인들으로 점령당할 것이다
Antique wall pushed down by cannon
고풍의 벽은 대포로 무너질 것이다
Due to fire and bloodshed, little mercy is received
화염과 학살로 인하여, 작은 은총이 (용인될)받아들여질 것이다

I.24 French King Henry gives Thanksgiving to God.
     프랑스의 왕 헨리는 신에게 감사의 기도을 드린다.

A Cite Nevue pensif pour condamner
Loisel de Proie au ciel se vient offrir
Apres Victoire a captifs pardonner
Cremone et Mantoue grands maux auront ouffert

NOTE:
Nevue (neuf , neuve): new; pentif: pensive, thoughtful; condamner: to condemn; Loisel de Proie: the anagram of Roi de soleil , King Henry of France; offrir: to offer; Cremona: commune N. Italy in Lombardy, on River Po; Mantua: commune N.Italy in Lombardy WSW of Venice; maux: (plural of mal) evil, wrong, bad; ouffert (offert): presented.

A cultural modern city shall be condemned
문화적인 현대적인 도시는 저주받을 것이며
King of France looking up to Heaven shall make an offer
하늘을 찾는 프랑스의 왕은 기도할 것이며
After victory, shall pardon prisoners
승리 후에, 죄수들을 용서하리라
Cremona and Mantua shall hand over great criminals of war
Cremona와 Mantua는 전쟁의 범죄들을 넘겨줄 것이다

COMMENT: The term "Cite Nevue" was mentioned once more in a quatrain which described the great earthquake in Sans Franscico of California. Thus this city might be buried due to earthquake and lava after the World War.

V.6 Henri, the Emperor of the world.
    헨리, 세상의 황제(지배자)

Au Roy l'augure sur le chef la main mettre
Viendra prier pour la paix Italique
A la main gauche viendra changer le sceptre
De Roy viendra Empereur pacifique

NOTE:
Augure: augur, prophet, clergyman, here the pope; main: hand; mettre: to place, prier: to pray; paix: peace; gauche: left; pacifique: peace time.

To the King the Pope, upon the chief lays his hand
교황(과) 왕에게로, 지배자의 위로 그의 손을 놓을 것이며(내릴 것이며)
Shall pray for peace in Italy
이탈리아에서 평화를 위해 기도하리라
In the left hand shall change the scepter
왼손에서 왕권은 바뀔 것이다
From King to the Emperor of peace
왕으로부터 평화의 황제(지배자)로

COMMENT: The pope shall annoint King Henry of France as the Roman Emperor of the Christian world, a title similar to the one of Charlesmagne of old.

VI.70 King Henry of France, the Victor of the world, the modern Roman Emperor.
      프랑스의 왕 헨리, 세상의 승리자, 현대 로마의 황제.

Un chef du monde le grand Chyren sera
Plus outre, apres ayme, craint, redoute
Son bruit et los les cieux sur passera
Et du seul titre Victeur, fort content

NOTE:
Chyren: anagram of Henry; outre: scandalized, indignant; plus: more, most; ayme (aimer): to love; craint: fear; redoute: redoubt; bruit: noise, thunder; los: reverse of sol or soleil, bightness; cieux: heavens; seul: sole, single, titre: title; content: content, pleased.

The leader of the world, the Great Henry shall be
세상의 지도자, 위대한 헨리는 매우
Much scandalized, after much beloved, now fear and doubt
모욕 당하게 될 것이며, 후에 매우 사랑받게 되며, 이제 두려움과 거짓
His fame and brilliance shall surpass heavens
그의 명예와 광채는 하늘을 능가할 것이며
And very content in the sole Title of Victor
그리고 하나만인 승리자의 자격을 매우 만족할 것이다

COMMENT: King Henry of France shall become the world leader after defeating Muslim and Russian invaders. He shall receive the unique Title of Victor from the holy Pontiff.

II.69 The Roman Emperor of the world.
     세상의 로마 황제.

Le Roy Gaulois par la Celtique dextre
Voyant discorde de la Grand Monarchie
Sur les trois parts fera fleurir son sceptre
Contre la cappe de la grand Hierachie

NOTE:
Roy Gaulois: King of France; Celtique: English or American; dextre: right hand; sur: upon; fleurir: to flourish; cappe (cape): the pope.

The King of France with Americans on his right hand
그의 오른쪽의 미국인들과 함께 프랑스의 왕은
Shall overcome any discord in his Great Monarchy
그의 거대한 군주국에서 어떤 불화라도 극복(정복)할 것이며
Upon three quarters of Europe, his scepter shall flourish
4분의 3의 유럽 위에, 그의 왕권이 융성할 것이다
The temporal counterpart of the spiritual Hierarchy under a holy pontiff
신성한 교황의 아래 영적인 천사군(群)의 임시적인 부본(사본,상대물)

COMMENT: King Henri of France shall be the leader of the world including Europe after the World War. He shall have strong support from USA. And in turn he himself shall be the temporal counterpart who are completely obedient to the Holy Father.

IV.77 Henry of France, the Christian Emperor of the world.
      프랑스의 헨리, 세상의 기독교의 황제.

Selin Monarque l'Italie pacifique
Regnes unis, Roy Chrestien du monde
Mourant voudra coucher en terre blesique
Apres pirates avoir chasse de l'onde

NOTE:
Selin: (Greek, la lune) moon, (fig.) Marian; unis:united; Chrestien: Christian; monde: world; mourant: dying; voudra (vouloir): to wish; coucher: to lay down; blesique: blessed, Terre blesique means Holy Land; chasser: to chase; onde: sea.

Marian Monarch pacifies Italy 
성모마리아의 왕이 이탈리아를 조정한다
Kingdoms united, Christian King of the world
왕국은 합쳐지고, 세상의 기독교 왕은
In dying shall wish to lay down in the Holy Land
임종에 신성한 땅에 눕혀지기를 원할 것이다
After chasing away the pirates from the sea (Muslims)
바다로부터의 해적(이슬람교도)를 몰아낸 후에

X.75 King Henry of France is the descendant of Empreror Charlemagne.
     프랑스의 왕 헨리는 샤를마뉴 대제(서로마 제국의 황제,742∼814)의 후예

Tant attendu ne reviendra jamais
Dedans l'Europe, en Asie apparoitra
Un de la ligne issu du grand Hermes
Et sur tous Roy des Orients croistra

NOTE:
Tant: so much; attendu: expected, awaited; reviendra (revenir): to return; jamais: ever; ne....jamais: never; dedans: inside, within; apparoistra (apparaitre): to appear; ligue: line, rank; Hermes: Greek mythical deity, messenger of the gods, here Charlemagne the Great; sur: over; croistra (croistre): to grow, to increase.

So long awaited shall never come back
너무나 오래도록 기다려도 유럽으로 돌아오지 않을 것이며
Into Europe, in Asia shall appear
 , 아시아에서 나타날 것이다
The one of the lineage issued from the great Hermes
혈통의 누군가 위대한 헤르메스 신으로부터 태어날 것이다
And over all the Kings of Orient he shall increase
그리고 동양의 모든 왕들을 지배하여(넘어서) 그는 강해질 것이다

COMMENT: The first line means that the Second Coming of the Lord is not yet happening. It is not yet the End of the world even how horrible the World War III will be. King Henry of France, the descendant of the ancient Emperor, shall defeat Muslim and Russian (Orient) and shall rule over all Europe and Muslim countries.

V.41 King Henry of France, the Roman Emperor of the modern world.
     프랑스의 왕 헨리, 현세의 로마의 황제.

Nai sous les umbres et journee nocturne
Sera en regne et bonte souveraine
Ferra renaistre son sang de l'antique urne
Renouvellant siecle d'or pour l'airain

NOTE:
Nai (nais or naitre): born; sous: under, below; umbre (ombre): shadow, obscurity; journee: day, daytime; nocturne: nocturnal, nightly; bonte: goodness; souveraine (souveranete): sovereignty, dominion; renaitre: to be reborn, restore; urne: urn; renouvellant: renewed; airain: bronze, here bronze serpent or the unbeleived, hard-hearted.

Born under obscurity and nocturnal darkness
불분명과 밤의 어둠 아래 태어난
Shall reign in firmness and goodness sovereignty
견실과 선한 주권(통치권)으로 통치할 것이다
He shall be the rebirth of the ancient blood
그는 고대 혈통의 부활이며
His reign shall be the golden period of renewal for the hard-hearted unbelief
그의 통치권은 무정한 불신을 때문에(위한) 일신의 전성기가 되리라

COMMENT: King Henry the French leader shall defeat Eastern alliance, shall renew the Faith, restore the Church, Papacy, and world peace. He is the descendant of the ancient Charlemagne. He shall be the modern Catholic Emperor of the world.

V.61 The Victor over the Eastern forces coming from a humble background.
     보잘 것 없는 배경으로부터 온 동쪽의 힘을 지배하는 승리자.

L'enfant du grand n'estant a sa naissance
Subjuera les hauts monts Apennins
Fera trembler tous ceux de la balance
Et des Monts Feux jusques a Mont Cenis

NOTE:
Estant (estimer): to value, appreciate; naissance: birth; subjuera (subjuer): to subjugate, master; haut: haughty; ceux; those; ceux de la balance: those who carry out the Divine Justice, here Muslims, Russians, and Chinese; feux: firing, flaming; jusques: till as far as; Cenis: Monte Cenisio, mountain on alps between France and Italy.

The infant of a great lineage shall not be esteemed at birth
위대한 혈통의 유아는 탄생시 존경받지 못하리라
Shall subdue the haughty over Mounts Appenines
Appenines 산(맥)을 넘어서 오만함(당당함)을 억제할 것이다(?)
Shall make all the Eastern forces tremble
모든 동쪽 군대를 떨게 만들 것이며
Over the flaming mountains as far as Mount Cenis
Cenis산 만큼 먼 불타는 산(에 의해서)을 넘어서

COMMENT: The French military commander, King Henry, was born in a humble background but he actually is the descendant of the Great Charlemagne. He shall defeat Eastern alliance who are served as the wrathful Army of God to punish the sinful Western Babylon.

III.100 Henry's humble origin.
       헨리의 비천한 가문.

Entre Gaulois le dernier honore
D'homme ennemy sera victorieux
Force et terrior en moment explore
D'un coup de trait quand mourra l'envieux

NOTE:
Entre:among; dernier: last; homme: man; terrior (terrier): earth, territory; en moment: at the moment; coup: blow, knock; trait: dart, arrow,bolt; envieux: jealous.

Among French the last honored (of) men
프랑스인 중에 최후의 영예로운 사람들은
Shall be victorious against his enemy
그의 적에 대항하여 의기양양할 것이며
Force and territory for a moment shall explore
군대와 잠시동안 영토는 탐험할 것이다(?)
With a lightning bolt while the envious shall die
번개로 시기심이 강한 동안에 죽을 것이다(?)

COMMENT: King Henry of France who comes from a humble background shall conquer the Muslim territories.

IV.93 The Birth of King Henry.
      헨리 왕의 탄생.

Un serpent veu proche du lit Royal
Sera par dame, nuit chiens n'abayeront
Lors naistre en France un Prince tant Royal
Du ciel venu tous les Princes verront

NOTE:
Veu: seen; proche: near; lit: bed; chien: dog; abayeront (aboyer): to bark; lors: then, thenceforth; naistre: to be born; tant: so; venu: coming; verront (voir): shall see.

The serpent shall be seen approaching a royal bed
한 숙녀가 악마가 왕실의 침대에 가까이 다가가는 것을 보게될 것이다
By one lady, at night dogs shall not bark
밤에 개들이 짖지 않을 것이며
Shall be born in France one Prince so royal
프랑스에서 대단히 당당한(왕다운) 왕자가 태어나게 되리라
From heaven sent all princes shall see
하늘이 보낸 (로부터) 모든 왕자들이 보이게 되리라.

COMMENT: Great King Henry of France was sent and anointed by God to lead His people back to Christ and defeat the wrathful armies.

V.75 The limping Henry shall conquer Muslim territories.
     절뚝거리는 헨리는 이슬람교도의 영토를 정복할 것이다.

Montera haut sur le bien plus a dextre
Demourra assis sur la pierre carree
Vers le midy pose a sa fenestre
Baston tortu en main bouchee serree

NOTE:
Montera (monter): to mount, go up; haut: high; bien: good; dextre: right hand; assis: seated; pierre: rock; carree: square; vers: toward; midy (midi): noon, the south; pose: posing; fenestre: window; baston (baton): stick, staff; tortu: crooked; bouche: mouth; serree: tight, closed.

Riding high upon the goodness of conservative right
보수적인 우익의 덕의 위로 올라탄
Steadfastly seated upon a solid rock
견고한 바위 위에 움직이지 않고 앉아있는 
Toward the south he faces through his window
남쪽 방향으로 그는 그의 창문을 통하여 마주하고 있다
Holding a crooked staff and his mouth tightly closed
구부려진 지팡이를 집고 그의 입을 꽉 다물고

COMMENT: The French commander Henry is described here right before he is about to embark a major campaign to conquer the Middle East or Muslim territories. He is prophesied to be limping and has to walk with a cane.

II.80 Henri , the holy King, shall walk with a limp.
     신성한 왕 헨리는 절뚝거린다.

Apres conflit du leffe l'eloquence
Par peu de temps se tramme saint, repos
Point on n'admet les grands a deliverance
Des ennemis sont remis a propos

NOTE:
Leffe: crippled man; tramme (tramer): to lay; repos: rest; admet (admettre): to admit, accept; point: not at all, not any; propos: purpose, resolution; a propos: in good time, at the right time; remiser: to store away, shelf; on: one, people.

After the conflict, the limping man of eloquence
충돌 후에, 절뚝이는 웅변(하는)의 절뚝거리는 사람이
After a while shall lay down for a holy rest
한동안 신성한 휴식을 위하여 눕혀질 것이다.
Nobody shall allow his great enemies to be delivered
아무도 그의 거대한 적에게 넘겨지는 것을 허락하지 않을 것이다.
The enemies shall be put away at due time
적들은 예정일에 매장당할 것이다.


II.79 Henry liberates all captives under Marian banner.
     헨리는 마리아의 표상아래 모든 포로를 석방할 것이다.

La barbe crespe et noire par engin
Subjuguera la gent cruelle et fiere
Le grand Chyren ostera du longin
Tous les captifs par Seline baniere

NOTE:
Barbe:beard; crespe (crepele): fizzy (air); engin: device, weaponry; subjuguer: to subdue, overcome; aster (oter): to take away, liberate; longin; ( not known); Seline: (Greek) belonged to the moon, here Marian; baniere: banner.

The one with fizzy black beard through a device 
(비등성의) 검은 수염을 가진 사람(one)이 장치를 통하여
Shall subdue the cruel and fierce people (Muslims)
잔인하고 흉포한 사람들(이슬람교도)들을 진압할 것이다.
The great Henry shall liberate
위대한 헨리는 마리아의 표상아래
All the captives under Marian banner
모든 포로를 석방할 것이다.

COMMENT: Consecrated his life to our Lady, King Henry of France shall be assisted by her to liberate all occupied terriotries from the brutal Muslim occupying forces.

VI.42 The Ogmion consecrates himself to our Lady.
      Ogmion은 우리의 마리아에게 그 자신을 바칠 것이다.

A l'Ogmion sera laisse le regne
Du grand Selin qui plus sera de faict
Par l'Italie estendra son enseigne
Regne sera par prudent contrefait

NOTE:
Ogmion: King of France; laisse (laisser): to entrust; Selin: here means Marian protection; qui plus: more than...; fait: action, feat; etendre: to spread out, extend; enseigne: mark, ensign; contrefait: here means adversaries or controversies.

The kingdom shall be entrusted to King of France
왕국은 프랑스의 왕에게 맡겨지게 될 것이다
Consecrated to our Lady, he shall accomplish much
우리의 마리아에게로 바쳐지고, 그는 많이 성취할 것이다
Through-out Italy, his legacy shall spread
이탈리아 도처에 그의 유산은 퍼질 것이다
Reign by prudence but not without controversies
신중함과 함께하는 권력 그러나 논쟁이 없는

COMMENT: The reign of the temporal Christian affairs shall be entrusted to the King of France. This quatrain might also describe Pope John Paul II who also consecrated his life and service to our Lady and who leads the Church despite much opposition. Nostradamus used the word Ogmion to indicate both the holy Pope and great King.

IV.20 King Henry is deserted.
      왕 헨리는 버림받을 것이다.

Paix ubertre long temps Dieu louera
Par tout son regne desert la fleur de lis
Corps morts d'eau, terre la l'on appartera
Aperant vain heur d'estre la ensevelis

NOTE:
Paix: peace; Dieu: God; louera (louer): to praise, bestow; desert: deserted; Fleur de Lis: Lily, symbol of French Monarch Henry; mort: death; apportera (apporter): to bring, supply; aperant: apparent; heur: good fortune; etre: being; ensevelir: to shroud, bury.

Peace for a long time God shall bestow
긴 시간동안 평화(를), 신은 줄 것이다
Throughout his reign, Fleur de Lis shall be deserted
그의 영토(힘,권능)의 도처에, Fleur de Lis는 버려질 것이다
Dead body near ocean, land one shall provide for him
가까운 바다에 죽은 몸, 땅(의) 사람들은 (미리) 그(에)를 준비(대비)할 것이다
Apparent vain glory one shall enshroud him with
분명한 헛된 영광의 사람들은 그를 뒤덮을 것이다... 무엇으로(with:?)

COMMENT: A long peace shall be given under Henri's leadership. He shall be controversial figure due to his steadfast obedience to the Holy See, conservative viewpoints and radical social reforms. He shall die in Marseilles.

VI.71 The dying moments of the beloved Henri.
      매우 사랑받는 헨리의 임종의 순간.

Quand on viendra le grand Roy parenter
Avant qu'il ait du tout l'ame rendue
On le verra bien tost apparenter
D'Aigles, Lions, Crois, Couronne vendue

NOTE:
Parenter (parente): kinship, affinity; avant: before; ame: soul, spirit; rendue: rendered; verrai (voir): to see, view; tost (tot): quickly, soon; apparenter: to arrange iinto a marriage, to have mcuh in common with; aigle: USA; lion: England; Crois: the cross, the church, couronne: crown, wreath; vendue: sold, corrupted.

When one looks upon the great King as his father
사람들이 그의 아버지처럼 위대한 왕을 찾을(회고할) 때
Before he renders his soul completely
그가 그의 영혼을 완전히 넘겨주기 전에
One shall feel the loss of a beloved one
사람들은 가장 사랑했던 사람의 잃음을 느끼게 될 것이다
Present are representatives from US, England, the Church, and earthly crown
현재(이제)는 미국, 영국, 교회, 지상의 왕관이 대리인이 된다

III.86 King Henry's birth-place, death-place, elevation to Sainthood.
      왕 헨리의 탄생지, 죽음의 장소, 성인으로 높여짐(승진?)

Un chef d'Ausonne aux Espagnes ira
Par mer fera arrest dedans Marseille
Avant sa mort un long temps languira
Apres sa mort l'on verra grand merveille

NOTE:
Ausonne: Bordeaux; ira (irai , aller): to go, travel; arrest (arret): to stop, rest; dedans: inside; avant: before; languir: to languish; verra (voir): to see; merveille: marvel, miracle.

The chief of Bordeaux to Spain shall travel
Bordeaux의 왕은 스페인으로 바다를 경유하여 
By the sea shall stop at Marseilles
여행을 할 것이며 마르세이유에서 멈출 것이다.
Before his death for a long time shall languish
그의 죽음의 긴 시간 이전에 쇠약해질 것이다.
After his death, one shall see great miracles
그의 죽음 뒤에, 사람들은 크나큰 기적을 볼 것이다.

COMMENT: The great leader of France was born in Bordeaux. He shall visit Spain and stay in Marseille where he shall breathe his last. He shall be venerated as a saint.

PART II:

VI.2 World War I and World War III.
     1차 세계대전과 3차 세계대전.

En l'an cinq cens octante plus et moins
On attend te siecle bien etrange
En l'an sept cens et trois (cieus en tesmoins)
Que plusieurs regnes un a cinq feront change

NOTE:
An: year; cens: one hundred; octante: eighty; plus et moins: plus or minus; on: one, people; attend (attendre): to wait for; siecle: century, age, period; etrange: strange; trois: three; cieus: heavens; tesmoins: testimonial; plusieur: many; regnes: kingdoms; un a cinq: one out of five.

In the year of 1580 plus or minus
1580년 정도에
One shall attend a very extraordinary period of time
사람들은 시간의 굉장히 이상한 순간을 경험할 것이다(출석할 것이다).
In the year of 1703 (heavens witness)
1703년에(하늘의 증거)
In which many kingdoms, one out of five shall be undone
많은 왕국들에서, 다섯을 넘어선 한 무엇이 세상을 망치도록 것이다.

- one out of five : six ??? 
- 1 2 3 4 5 / 6(1) 7(2) 8(3) 9(4) 10(5) ???

COMMENT: Nostradamus, on several extraordinary occasions, had used the liturgical reference of 325AD, the year on which the Council of Nicea was convened. Thus the year of 1580 plus or minus is actually 1580 + 325 = 1905 plus or minus or 1914 AD, the year of World War I. And 1703 should become 1703 + 325 or 2028AD, the year on which World War III shall end. One out five countries on earth shall be demolished by this long war.

X.89 Fifty seven years of peace.
     평화의 57년.

De brique en marbre serot les murs reduits
Sept et cinquante annees pacifique
Joye aux humains, renove l'aqueduct
Sante, grand fruits, joye et temps melifique

NOTE:
Brique: brick; marbre: marble; mur: wall; reduit: reduced, reconstructed; sept: seven; cinquante: fifty; an: year; pacifique: peaceful; renove (renover): renovated, restored; sant : health; melifique: mellifluous, rich with honey.

From brick into marble shall the walls be rebuilt
벽돌에서 대리석으로 벽을 재건하리라.
Seven and fifty peaceful years
7 그리고 50의 평화로 가득찬 해(year)동안
Joy to humans, renovation to aqueduct
기쁨이 인류에게, 혁신(쇄신)이 수로(水路)에게로
Good health, great fruits, joys and time flowing with honey and milk
건강, 풍성한 과일, 기쁨들과 시간이 꿀과 우유와 같이 흐름(?) => 풍성함

COMMENT: The period of peace shall last for fifty seven years.

X.99 Isaic Golden period of peace.
     Isaic의 평화의 전성기.

La fin le loup, le lyon, boeuf et l'asne
Timide dama seront avec mastins
Plus ne charra a eux la douce manne
Plus vigilance et custode aux mastins

NOTE:
La fin: the end; loup: wolf; boeuf: ox; asne (ane): ass; dama: (latin) deer; mastin (matin): mastiff, large watchdog, (fig.) ugly brute; plus ne...: no more...; charra (cherra, cherir): to nurse, nourish; eux: them; douce: swwet,bland, soft; manne: manna ; vigilance: vigilance, wakefulness; custode: (latin = custos) guard, guardian, watch.

At the end, the wolf, the lion, the ox and the ass
끝에, 늑대, 사자, 황소, 나귀
Timid deer shall be with wild dogs
겁많은(내성적인) 사슴은 야생의 개들과 같이 있게 될 것이다
No more feeding them with bland manna
부드러운 신의 양식으로 더 이상 그들에게 먹이 줌이 없고
No more being wakened and on guard against mastiff
더 이상 깨우칠 필요없고 그리고 맹견(mastiff)에 대항하는 호위병이 없다

I.43 Upon the Heavenly pillar, the Commandments of the Lord shall be engraved.
    하늘의 기둥 위에, 신의 명령이 새겨질 것이다.

Avant qu'avien le changement d'Empire
Il adviendra un cas bien merveilleux
Le champ mue. le pilier de Porphyre
Mis, translate sur le Rocher Noileux

NOTE:
Changement: change; adviendra (advenir): to occur; cas: case, event; merveilleux: marvellous, miraculous, supernatural; champ: field, open space; mue (mouvoir): to move, propel; pilier: pillar; Porphyre: porphyry, a rock consisting of felspar crystals embedded in a compact dark red or purple ground mass; mis: placed; translate: moved, rocher: rock, cliff; Noileux: anagram of loix-neu meaning new laws.

Before the change in the Empire
제국에서 변화 이전에
One extraordinary event shall take place
이상한 사건이 일어나리라
The open field shall quake
열린 장소는 흔들리고
On the pillar of Porphyry stone, The Divine New Laws shall be placed
예언의 비석의 한 기둥에, 신의 새로운 법(말씀)이 새겨질 것이다.

COMMENT: Before the period of peace or before World War III, the heavenly permanent Sign shall be given to mankind in the form of a sky-high pillar of beautiful stone on which the Commandments of the Lord are engraved. This Sign shall be with us till the End of the world according to the Marian apparitions in Garabandal of Spain.

VIII.97 New players in the world arena after the WW III.
       제 3차 세계대전 이후에 세상의 투기장의 새로운 노름꾼.

Aux fine du var changer le pempotans
Pres du rivage, le trois beaux enfants naitre
Ruine au peuple par age competans
Regne au pays charger plus croistre

NOTE:
Fin: the end; var: mispelled of the English word "war"; pempotans: (not known); pres: near; rivage: beach, coast; beaux: beautiful, naitre: to be born; competans: competent, here well- developed or once-prosperous (countries); pays: nation, land, region; charger: to burden, load, charge; croistre: to grow, increase.

At the end of the war the pempotans shall change
전쟁 끝에 pempotan들은 바뀔 것이다
Near the coast, three beautiful infants shall be born
해변 가까이에, 3명의 아름다운 유아가 태어나고
Ruin to those people in competent age
충분한 나이에 그들을 위한 파멸
Reign in nation shall charge (tax) too much to grow
나라의 권력은 성장하기 위해 매우 많이 채워질 것이다.

COMMENT: Taxing shall be too burdensome to citizens. Ruins shall come to the developed countries. After the War, the world power or political arena shall change. Three countries near the coast shall emerge as powerful countries. These three might be France, Greece, and Egypt.

VIII.4 France shall become the world leader while US fades away.
      프랑스는 미국이 사라진 동안 세계의 주도자가 된다.

Dedans Monech le Coq sera receu
Le Cardinal of France apparoistra
Par Logarion Romain sera deceu
Foiblesse a l'Aigle, et force au coq naitra

NOTE:
Monech: Monaco; Coq: cock or france; receu: received; apparoistre (apparaitre): to appear; Logarion: anagram of Dragon; deceu (decevoir): to deceive; faiblesse: weakness; force: power.

In Monaco the King of France shall be received
모나코에서 프랑스의 왕은 받게될 것이다
The French Cardinal shall become more visible
프랑스 추기경은 (더 많이 보일 것이다)더 많아질 것이다
By the ancient Dragon, the clergy shall be deceived
고대의 용으로 인해, 성직자는 기만(속임)당할 것이다
Weakness to US, power toward France
미국의 허약함으로 힘은 프랑스에게로

COMMENT: The King of France shall bring peace to the world. French cardinal shall become the holy pope during the period of peace. He will rebuild the Church and abolish all heretics. US shall lose the world super-power status to France. The whole world shall look toward France for leadership.

V.80 King of France chases away Islamic league. Christianity shall win over Islam.
      프랑스의 왕은 회교도의 동맹을 쫓아낸다. 기독교는 이슬람교를 끌어들일 것이다.

L'Ogmion grand Bisance approchera
Chasses sera la Barbarique Ligue
Des deux loix l'une l'unique laschera
Barbare et France en perpetuelle brigue

NOTE:
Ogmion: Nostadamus used this title for King Henry or Pope John Paul II; Barbarique Ligue: Muslim league; loix: law; laschera (lacher): to loosen, liberate; brigue: conspiracy.

Great King of France shall approach Turkey
프랑스의 위대한 왕은 터키에 도달할 것이다.
Chase away the Muslim league
이슬람 동맹을 쫓아내고
Between two laws, one shall propagate the universal (Catholic)
두 법(칙) 사이에서, 사람들은 전세계에 (카톨릭교를)전파할 것이다
Muslims and France shall perpetually undermine one another
이슬람교도와 프랑스는 영구적으로 서로를 잠식할 것이다.

COMMENT: King Henry shall defeat Muslims. Christian Faith shall be evangelized over Islamic faith. France and Muslim nations shall be constantly engaged in conflicts or confrontation.

V.53 The Holy Spirit is at work. The Orient shall join the Church.
     신성한 정신(영혼)이 나타난다. 동양은 교회에 합류한다.

La loi de Sol et Venus contendans
Apparopriant l'esprit de prophetie
Ne l'un ne l'autre ne seront entendans
Par Sol tiendra la loi du grand Messie

NOTE:
Loi: law; Sol: the Sun, (fig.) the Lord Jesus; Venus: goddess of sex, the Harlot, (fig.) the sinful world, the Babylon; contendans: contend, dispute; esprit: spirit; apparopriant: appear; prophetie: prophecy; ne l'un ne l'autre: neither one or another; entendu: competent, understood; tiendra: shall hold, possess; Messie: Messiah.

The law of Truth and Flesh shall contend
진실(영)과 육욕의 법이 강력히 주장될 것이다.
The Spirit shall inspire men prophesy
영혼은 인간에게 예언의 영감을 주고
Neither Truth nor Flesh shall be accepted universally
진실(영)이나 육욕 어떤 것도 전세계적으로 허용되지 않을 것이다.
Through the Orient, the Law of the Great Messiah shall hold
동양에 까지, 위대한 메시아의 법(말씀)을 받들 것이다.

COMMENT: Asian countries shall join the Church.

V.93 After the Marian Age, the Age of Mercy, the Chastisements shall come. Scotland and England shall become Catholic.
     마리아의 시대 이후인, 자비의 시대에 응징이 올 것이다. 스코틀랜드와 영국은 카톨릭교를
     믿게 될 것이다.

Sous le terroir de rond globe lunaire
Lors que sera dominateur Mercure
L'isle d'Escosse sera un luminaire
Qui les Anglois mettra a deconfiture

NOTE:
Sous: under; terroir: territory; rond: round; lunaire: lunary, here Marian; lorsque: when; dominateur: ruler; Mercure: Mercury, (fig.) God's chastisements; Escosse: Scotland; luminaire: light; Anglois: England; mettra (mettre): to place, put; deconfiture: moral defeat, failure.

After the Marian Age manifested throughout the whole globe
마리아의 시대 후에 모든 지구 곳곳에 (명백하게 되고)
The Chastisements from God shall rule
신으로부터의 응징이 지배하게 될 것이다
The Island of Scotland shall consecrate to the Virgin
스코틀랜드 섬은 동정녀 마리아께 바칠 것이며
Who shall put England to shame
스코틀랜드는 영국을 부끄럽게 할 것이다(?)

COMMENT: Scotland shall return to the Church first and then shall help England to join later.

VIII.96 Israeites the chosen ones shall join the Church.
        선택된 (민족)이스라엘 사람들은 교회에 합류할 것이다.

La Synagogue sterile sans nul fruit
Sera receue entre les infideles
De Babylon la fille du persuit
Misere et triest lui trenchera les aisles

NOTE:
Sans: without; nul: non,nil; receu: received; entre: among; fille: daughter, girl; persuit: pursuited; misere: miserable; triest (triste): sad; lui: him, her; trenchera (trancher): to cut, sever; aisle (aile): wing.

Synagogue sterile without bearing fruits
열매를 맺지못함으로 인해 황폐화된 시나고그(유대 교회)는
Shall be received among the infidels
이교도 사이에서 받아들여지게 될 것이다
From the Great Babylon the harlot being pursuited
거대한 바빌론으로부터 매춘부는 추격당하게 된다
Miserable and sad her wings being cut off
불쌍하고 가엷은 그녀의 날개는 잘려 나간다.

COMMENT: During the period of peace, Jews shall convert to Christianity among others. Harlotry, the sin of flesh in the present world shall be curtailed or forbidden.

VIII.99 The Holy See shall move to another location.
        신성한 교황은 또다른 장소로 이동할 것이다.

Par la puissance de trois Roys temporels
En autre lieu sera mis le Saint Siege
Ou la substance de l'esprit corporel
Sera remis et receu pour vrai siege

NOTE:
Puissance: power; temporel: temporal; autre: another; Saint Siege: Holy See; ou: where; esprit: spirit; remis (remettre): to put back, remit, reconcile; receu (recevoir): to receive, admit; vrai: true siege: seat, papacy.

Through the power of three temporal kings
3명의 임시적인 왕의 힘으로
In another place the Holy See shall be located
또다른 장소에서 교황은 자리잡게 된다.
Where the Substance of the corporal Spirit
(윗 문장에 부가)육체의 본체(실체)에,
Shall be remitted and received through the true papacy
진실한 교황을 통하여 영혼은 용서받게 되고 받아들여지게 된다.

COMMENT: The papacy shall be moved to another city as Rome was completely ruined and shall be supported and obeyed by three temporal kings, probably USA, England, and mostly France. The Church shall be renewed, shall be the truly Eucharistic Church once again.

VI.8 Scientific and humanistic knowledges shall be discouraged, spiritual learning encouraged.
	과학적이고 인문(인본)주의적인 지식들은 용기를 잃게할 것이며, 영적인 배움은 용기를 가지게 할 것이다.

Ceux qui estoient en regne pour scavoir
Au Royal change deviendront appouvris
Uns exilez sans appui, or n'avoir
Lettres et lettres ne seront a grand pris

NOTE:
Ceux: those; estoient (etoiler): to shine as stars; scavoir (savoir): knowledge, learning; deviendront (devenir): to become; appauvrir: to impoverish, exhaust; pris (priser): highly esteemed, praised; exilez: exiled, banished; appui: support; or: gold; n'avoir: have not.


Those who are now renowned in the realm of knowledge
(지식의 범위)지식층에서 유명한 그들은
Shall become impoverished during change of the kingdom
왕국의 변화동안에 힘을 잃게 되리라.
One shall become banished without support or money
이들은 부양(지원)과 돈 없음으로 사라지게 될 것이다.
Volumes upon volumes shall no longer be esteemed
책위의 책은 더 이상 존경받지 못할 것이다.

COMMENT: The worldly knowledges such as humanistic, scientific learning, and the likes shall be disregarded and discouraged after the World War III by the new leaders of the Christian world which shall be led by the Christian King of France. Only moral and spiritual learning shall be encouraged.

IX.66 Changes during the period of peace.
	평화의 기간동안의 교체.

Paix, union sera et changement
Estats, offices, bas haut et haut bien bas
Dresser voyage, le fruit premier, torment
Guerre cesser, civils proces, debats

NOTE:
Paix: peace; bas: low; haut: high; bien: very; dresser: to set up; voyage: here means missionary work or evangelization; premier: first; cesser: to cease; proces: civil lawsuit; debat: debate.

Peace and union shall come and changes
평화와 연합이 다가올 것이며 바뀔 것이다.
Estates, offices, low lifted high and high brought down very low
재산(지위), 임무(직책), 낮은 것은 높은 것으로 높은 것은 매우 낮은 곳으로
Set up evangelization, the first fruit, and torment
복음전도를 시작하고, 첫 번째 과일, 그리고 고통
War stops, civil lawsuit, and debates
전쟁은 멈추고, 시민 소송, 그리고 논쟁

COMMENT: After the World War, many social changes shall take place with many offices which are now considered esteemed shall be debased or abolished ( scientific, social, judicial activities to name a few). Missionary works shall be numerous with many shall join the Catholic Church and Christian Faith for the first time (first fruit). However, there shall be much hardship (torment) during this period of peace. Disputes shall be settled peacefully through the court of law instead of war.


VIII.100 Great hardship and lack of resources after the War.
	전쟁 후의 엄청난 고난과 자원의 부족.

Pour l'abundance de l'arme respandue
Du haut en bas, par le bas au plus haut
Trop grande foi par jeu vie perdue
De soif mourir par abondant deffaut

NOTE:
Respandue: widely distributed; haut: high; bas: low; trop: too, too much; foi: faith; jeu: sport, play; par jeu: for fun; vie: life; perdue: lost, ruined, wasted; soif: thirst; mourrir: to die; defaut: want, default, need.

Through the abundance of the armies widely distributed
많은(?풍요한) 군대들이 넓게 분포됨을 통하여
High shall be brought low, and low raised up high
높음은 낮음으로, 그리고 낮음은 높음으로
Too great the faith, for fun life shall be be ruined
너무나도 큰 신념(믿음), 즐거운 인생을 위해 몰락할 것이다.
Die due to thirst, due to the abundance of needs
갈증으로 인해 죽어가며, 많은 필요들로 인해 죽어간다.

COMMENT: After the World War III, heavy burdens of carrying large arm forces and the devastation of war shall present great deal of hardship compounded with the natural disasters such as drought and plagues. Social values and structure of society shall be turned upside down for the better with more emphasis on moral, spiritual education, simpler life styles and so on. Life shall be rougher but Faith shall be very strong.

IV.21 More about the period of peace.
	평화의 기간에 대하여 조금 더 언급하자면.

Le changement sera fort difficile
Cite province au change gain sera
Coeur haut, prudent mis, chasse lui habile
Mer, terre, peuple, son estat changera

NOTE:
Fort: very strong; gain: gain ,success; coeur: heart; chasse (chaser): to chase away; lui: him, to him; habile: clever, cunning.

The change shall be very difficult
변화는 매우 어렵게 되어질 것이다.
City and province shall gain due to change
도시와 지방은 변화로 인하여 얻게될 것이다
Haughty heart, prudent placed, chase away the cunning ones
오만한 마음, 신중한 자리잡힘, 교활한 사람들을 쫓아버린다
Sea, land, people, estate (social status) shall change
바다, 땅, 사람, 신분(사회적인 상태)는 바뀔 것이다.

III.97 The Middle East shall become the occupied land.
	중동은 땅을 빼앗기게 될 것이다.

Nouvelle loi terre neuve occuper
Vers la Syrie, Judee et Palestine
Le grand Empire Barbare corruer
Avant que Phebe son siecle determine

NOTE:
Nouvelle: new; loi: law; neuve: new; vers: towards, around; corruer (latin = corruo): to fall; avant: before; Phebes (Phoebe): Diana or lune, sister of Phoebus, the sun, here indicating Blessed Mary.

A new law shall occupy the new land
새로운 법은 새로운 땅을 차지하게 될 것이다
Toward Syria, Judea and Palestine
Syria, Judea, Palestine쪽으로
The Great Barbarian (Muslim) Empire shall collapse
거대한 바빌론인들(이슬람교도)의 제국은 무너진다
Before the cycle of the Moon determined
달의 주기가 결정되기 이전에(한달 내에?)

COMMENT: Middle East shall become the occupied territory, controlled by the Western countries. Muslim force shall be defeated before the Marian era is over.


