
  < 노스트라다무스 예언서 03 >
==================================

 이 글은 확실하게 번역된 것이 아니므로 공개의 목적에는 사용할 수 없습니다. 단지 개인적인 이해의 정도로만 사용하시길 바랍니다. 사실 이 글
의 많은 부분이 제가 해석하기가 어려웠고, 또한 이글에서 사용되는 프랑스어 원문을 영어로 번역하는 과정에도 방언의 완전한 해석이나 문장 배열이 불완전함으로 인하여 완벽하지 못합니다. 단지 어느 정도 영문을 읽을 수 있는 사람을 위해 이 원문이 작성되었음을 알려드립니다. 저자는 확실하지 않습니다. 알아내는대로 이곳에 그의 인터넷 페이지 주소와 출처를 기재하겠습니다.


CHAPTER III


{{{{PART I:
}}
}} The abandoned vineyard, the present state of the Church.
           버림받은 포도원, 교회의 현재 상태
{{{{PART II:
}}
}} The purification of Divine winepress, Christian persecution during the World War III.
           신의 포도즙짜는 기구의 정제(정화), 3차 세계대전 중의 그리스도교도 박해
{{{{PART III:
}}
}} The Divine Providence.
           신의 섭리

PART I:

III.65 The murder of Pope John Paul I.
      John Paul(존 파울) Ⅰ세 교황의 살인.

Quand le sepulchre du grand Romain trouve
Le jour apres sera eleu pontife
Du senat gueres it ne sera prouve
Empoisonne son sang au sacre scyphe

NOTE:
Trouve (trouver): to discover, find; eleu: elected; senat: senate; guerre: war; il: he, it, there; prouve (prouver): to prove; empoisonne (empoissoner): to poison; sacre: sacred; scyphe (syphon): syphon, drain trap.

When the tomb of a great Roman discovered
위대한 로마의 왕의 무덤이 발견되면
The day after the pontif shall be elected
하루 뒤에 교황이 뽑힐 것이다.
Due to war with the senate, it shall never be proved
원로원의 싸움(전쟁)으로 인하여, 그것은 절대로 판명되지 않을 것이다
That he was poisoned and his blood in the sacred drain trap
그것 : 그는 중독되었고 신성한 그의 피는 입(덫,음모)으로 흘러내린다.

COMMENT: After the tomb of Saint Peter was discovered, Pope Paul I was elected and murdered with poison. Another quatrain in the next chapter also indicates that both John Paul's will eventually be martyred.


II.30 The New Mass of many languages, the antichrist.
     많은 언어들의 새로운 모임, 적그리스도

Un qui les dieux d'Annibal infernaux
Fera renaistre, effrayeur des humains
Oncq plus d'horreur ne plus dire journaux
Qu' advint viendra par Babel aux Romains

NOTE:
Dieu: God; Annibal: ancient King Annibal who once terrorized Rome, the new "resurrected" Annibal kings of Eastern alliance also terrorize the modern Rome or the Church; infernaux: infernal, devilish; renaitre: to be born; revive; effrayeur: to terrify; oncq: ever, never; dire: to say, speak; journal: journal, paper; advint (advenir): to happen; viendra: shall come; Babel: here means the Mass of many languages; Romain: here means clergy or Catholics.

One whom the infernal gods of Annibal
Annibal(로마를 두려움애 떨게 했던 고대의 왕)의 지옥의 신들 하나가
Shall be reborn to terrorize mankind
인류를 공포의 도가니로 몰아넣기 위해 태어나리라
Never greater horror have been reported
일찍이 거대한 공포가 보고되리라
One shall come due to the Babel Mass given to the clergy
누군가 바벨의 덩어리를 성직자에게 주려고 올 것이다.

COMMENT: The Eastern or Muslim alliance shall be the modern Annibal who shall invade and destroy Rome and persecute Christians in Europe. The brutal invaders shall come as the direct consequence of the irreverence to the Holy Mass or Holy Eucharist and due to the abandonment of the Church's Teaching and Tradition. This quatrain amazingly describes accurately the wrongful implementation of Vatican II begining with the introduction of the New Mass and modern liturgical reforms which border with heretics.

II.13 The walking dead, death shall replace birth.
     죽음이 걸어다님(죽은자가 살아나며), 죽음이 탄생을 대신하리라.

Le corps sans ame plus n'etre en sacrifice
Jour de la mort mis en nativite
L'esprit divin fera l'ame felice
Voyant le verbe en son eternite

NOTE:
Corps: body, dead corp; ame: soul; felice (felicite): happiness, joy; voyant (voir): shall see; verbe (Verbe): the Word of God.

The walking dead without soul shall no longer enter into the Holy Sacrifice 
영혼이 없이 죽은자가 살아남(죽음의 걸어다님)은
더 이상 신성한 희생으로 들어가지 못할 것이다
The day of death shall replace the day of birth
죽음의 날은 탄생의 날을 대신하리라
The Holy Spirit shall comfort a soul
신성한 정신은 영혼을 편안하게 할 것이다
Who shall see the Word in his eternity
그의 영세에서 복음을 보게 될 것이다

COMMENT: The evil generation shall no longer receive the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. Many shall still attend Mass but with much disrespect, indifference, or blasphemy. Death shall replace birth when the culture of death (abortion and violence) become acceptable. For the true believers, God is still with him.

IV.25 Men become walking dead with less desire for prayer.
      사람들은 기도에 대한 적은 욕구로 죽음으로 걷게 되리라.

Corps sublimes sans fin a l'oeil visibles
Obnubiler viendra par ses raisons
Corps, front compris, sense, chef et invisibles
Dimineant les sacrees oraisons

NOTE:
Corps: body, substance; sans: without; fin : the end; l'oeil: eye; obnubiler: to obscure; ses: (plural) his, her; raison: reason; front: forehead, head; compris (comprendre): enclosed; dimineant: shall diminish; sacree: sacred; oraison: prayer.

Eternal Sublime Substance once visible to naked eyes
영원은 한 번 나안으로 볼 수 있음으로 물질을 고상하게 하고
Shall be made obscure due to rationalism
(종교적)이성주의를 인하여 흐리게 되리라
Walking dead, enclosed mind, blind judment, invisible heads (chief)
죽은자의 걸어다님(영생?), 마음의 닫음, 심판을 알아보지 못함, 보이지 않는 지도자
Shall diminish the sacred prayer
신성한 기도하는 사람들이 줄어들게 될 것이다.

COMMENT: Prayers shall be diminished while men become walking dead.
            기도하는 사람은 인간이 죽음의 걸음이 있는 동안(?) 줄어들 것이다.

II.12 Blindness of legal system, Apostasy from the clergy.
     법률 체계의 맹목, 성직자로부터의 변절(배신)

Yeux clos ouverts d'antique fantasie
L'habit des seules seront mis a neant
Le grand monarque chastira leur frenaisie
Ravir des temples le thresor par devant

NOTE:
Yeux: (plural of oeil) eyes; clos: closed; ouvert: opened; fantasie (fantiasie): fancy, imagination; habit: religious habit; seule: single, here celibate; neant: nothing; chastira (chatier): to chastise, punish; frenaisie (frenesie): madness, frenzy; ravir: to carry off, rob of; thresor (tresor): treasure; devant: before, ahead.

Eyes closed now opened because of the antique temptation
고대의 유혹 때문에 닫혔던 눈이 이젠 열리게 된다
The celibate shall abandon their habits
독신주의자는 그들의 습관(기질)을 버리게 될 것이며
The great king shall chastise them for their frenzy blindness
위대한 왕은 그들의 광포(광란)의 맹목(무분별)로 그들을 비난할 것이다
After they have ravished the Church's properties
후에 그들은 교회의 재산을 강탈할 것이다

COMMENT: Eyes closed figuratively indicate a just justice. Eyes now opened means a distorted legal system. There shall be no longer a legal justice due to greed, bias, artificial technicality, and human blindness. The religious shall be chastised for their abandonment of the Church's Teaching and Tradition, and for misleading their fold. Sadly today the religious refuse to wear their habits which signify the highest distinction and also the vow and commitment to their Creator.

II.8 The Church becomes humanistic or neo-paganistic while abandoning the Sacred Doctrines& Traditions.
     신성한 교의와 성전을 피하는 동안
     그리스도교도들은 인도주의적으로 되거나 신(부흥)이교(異敎)주의가 될 것이다.

Temples sacrez prime facon Romaine
Reietteront les goffes fondemens
Prenant leurs loix premieres et humaines
Chassant, non tout, des saints les cultemens

NOTE:
Sacrez: sacred, consecrated; prime: primitive, early; facon: fashion; reitteront (rietirer): to reiterate, repeat; goffe (gofle): consumed (with pride); fondemens (fondement): foundation ; prenant: fascinating; loix: laws; premiere: first; chassant: shall chase, follow; tout: all cultemens (culte): religious practice.

Temples shall be consecrated to the early Roman rituals
교회는 초기의 로마의 의식들로 봉헌하리라(신성하게 하리라)
Shall reiterate the hollow foundation
무의미한 창설을 되풀이하리라
Using laws based on natural human instincts
선천적인 인간의 본능에 기초한 법의 사용
Shall follow in parts, not all, the saintly traditions
나누어서, 모두가 아닌, 성도다운 성전을 추구할 것이다

COMMENT: The Church shall become neo-paganistic due to the abandonment of the Holy Teaching and Tradition. Religious practices shall be based on modernistic humanism and animal instincts. The Teaching of the Church by her Magisterium shall be accepted only in parts, not as the whole. Catholics are now labeled "cafeteria" Catholics.

VI.10 Ecumeism in the West, Paganism in the East, Natural disasters abounded.
      서방에 세계 교회주의, 동방에 무종교주의, 자연 재해가 많이 있게 된다.

Un peu de temps les temples de coleurs
De blanc et noir les deux entremeslee
Rouges et jaunes leur embleront les leurs
Sang, terre, peste, faim. feu, d'eau affolee

NOTE:
Peu: a little while; temps: time; blanc: white; noir: black; entremeler: to mix, mingle;; rouge: red, here communist; jaune: yellow, here Chinese; , les leurs: their own; embleront: shall embrace; peste: plague; faim: famine; feu: fire; eau: water; affolce: terrified, panic-stricken.

For short time, temples of many colors erected
짧은 시간에, 많은 색깔의 교회들이 생겨나게 된다
People shall not distinguish black and white
사람들은 흑과 백을 구분하지 않게 되며
Red and yellow embrace their own kinds
빨강과 노랑은 그들의 고유한 종류로 받아들인다
Blood, land, plague, famine, fire, panic-stricken by flood
피, 땅, 전염병, 기근, 화재, 홍수로 인한 당황

COMMENT: The false ecumanical movement of the presence shall mingle many religious sects without possessing the Truth or True Faith. It is the disguise to secularize the Church.

VII.7 Apocalyptical horsemen advance while heretical shepherds lead
     their sheep to the dungeon.
    세계종말의 기수(승마자)는 이교의 양치기가 그들의 양을 지하 감옥으로 안내하는
    동안에 전진할 것이다.

Sur le combat des grands chevaus legers
On criera le grand croissant confond
De nuit tuer moutons, habits de bergers
Abisme rouges dans le fosse profond

NOTE:
Chevau (chevaux): horse, horse-rider; leger: light, swift; crier: to cry; croissant: Muslims; confond (confondre): to confound, to bring to confusion; nuit: night; tuer: to kill, slaughter; mouton: sheep; berger: shepherd; abismes: abyss; rouge: red; fosse: pit; profond: deep .

Upon the combat against the great apocalyptical horsemen
거대한 계시(록)의 기수(승마자)에 대항하는 전쟁에서
One shall cry in confusion while great Muslim invaders advance
누군가 거대한 이슬람교도 침입자들이 전진하는 동안 혼돈 속에 울부짓을 것이다.
In darkness of the night, sheep shall be slaughtered
by heretical clergy disguised in habits of shepherds
밤의 어둠 속에서, 양(羊)은 양치기(의 습관[모습?]으)로 변장한 이교도 성직자로
인해 도살당할 것이다.
The flaming abyss in the deep dungeon awaits many
깊숙한 지하 감옥의 불타는 심연(지옥)에서 많은 것들이 기다리고 있다.

COMMENT: (Too sad for me to make any comment.)

III.92 The Apocalypse or the end times.
      계시;묵시 또는 종말의 시간

Le monde proche du dernier periode
Saturn encor tard sera de retour
Translat empier devers nation Brodde
L'oeil arrache a Narbon par autour

NOTE:
Monde: world; proche: near; dernier: last, latest; dernier periode: the end times; Saturn: (fig.) the Lord; encor: again; tard: late; retour: coming back, return; translat: to turn into; empier: empire; devers: on the side of, toward; Brodde: rodden; oeil: eye; arrache (arracher): to pull out; Narbon: Narbonne, city of S. France, near the Mediterranean Sea; autour: hawk.

The world near the last period
종말에(마지막 기간에) 가까워진 세상
The Lord again shall be late in return
신은 다시 되돌아옴에 늦어 버린다
The Roman empire shall translate into a rodden nation
로마 제국은 권력의 나라로 바뀔 것이다(?)
Eyes shall be picked out in Narbonne by the hawk
눈은 Narbonne에서 매에게 쪼임을 당할 것이다.

COMMENT: The end times are not the End of the world, therefore, the Second Coming of the Lord shall not yet take place. During this last period of human history, the Church or the Christian Roman Empire shall be deteriorating. Narbonne or coastal France shall be attacked by hostile forces.

PART II:


I.44 Christians shall be subjected to martyrdom during World War III.
     3차 세계대전 동안 그리스도교도는 순교를 위임 받을 것이다

En bref seront de retour sacrifices
Contrevenans seront mis a martyre
Plus ne seront moines, abbez ne novices
Le miel sera beaucoup plus cher que cire

NOTE:
Bref: brief; retour: return; contrevenant: offender; martyre: martyrdom; plus ne: no more; moine: monk; abbez: abbot; miel: honey; cher: dear, cherished; cire: wax.

For a brief time, sacrifices shall reccur
잠시의 시간동안, 희생은 (발생하리라)
Offenders shall be subject to martyrdom
범죄자는 순교를 위임당할 것이다
No more monks, abbots or novices
(죽어서) 그이상의 수도자, 대수도 원장, 또는 초신자
Food (honey) shall be more cherished than wax candles
음식(꿀)은 양초보다 더 소중하게 되리라.

COMMENT: Religious persecution during wars and great loss of faith.Offenders are the unfaithful Christians who are offending God.

VIII.93 Schism shall take place at the beginning of the War.
        분파(분열)이 전쟁의 시작에 일어나리라.

Sept mois sans plus obtiendra prelature
Par son decez grand scisme fera naistre
Sept mois tiendra un autre la preture
Pres de Venise paix union renaistre

NOTE:
Mois: month; obtiendra (obtenir): to obtain; sans plus: no more than; prelature: prelate, bishop; decez (deces): deceased; scisme: schism; autre: another; preture (prelature): prelate; renaistre: to be reborn.

No more than seven months one shall obtain the papacy
7달 이내로 누군가 교황권을 얻을 것이다
Through his death great schism shall be born
그의 죽음으로 거대한 분열이 생길 것이다(태어나리라)
Seven months another one shall tenure
7달 동안 다른 한사람이 보유하리라
Near Venise peace and union shall be born again
베니스 가까이 평화와 연합은 다시 생겨나리라.

COMMENT: At the beginning of the European conflict, one pope who is probably the successor of John Paul II, shall reign only for seven months. He might be martyred by the the occupying forces. Great Schism shall take place after his death as his successor shall be a liberal one. At the end of the War, another pope shall reign also for seven months and he shall be martyred by the withdrawing Muslim force. Afterwards, peace shall come.


VI.25 Italians shall betray papacy. A young African cardinal shall be elected pope.
     이탈리아인은 교황을 배반하리라. 젊은 아프리카 추기경이 교황으로 뽑히게 되리라.

Par Mars constraire sera la Monarchie
Du grand pescheur en trouble ruineux
Jeune, noire, rouge prendra la hierarchie
Les proditeurs iront jour bruineux

NOTE:
Constraire: contrary, opposite; pescheur (pecheur): fisherman; ruineux: disastrous, in ruin; jeune: young; prendra: take, manage; proditeur: (latin = proditor) traitor; bruineux (brumeux): misty.

War shall adversely affect the Monarchie
전쟁은 불리하게 지배자에게 영향을 주리라
Of the great fisherman which shall be in trouble and ruin
여러움과 파멸 속에 놓인 위대한 어부(?)
The young, black, and red shall take over the hierarchie
젊은이, 검정, 그리고 빨강은 교주(고위 성직자)에게 (정신적) 타격을 가할 것이다
The traitors shall penetrate on a misty day
반역자는 안개낀 날에 (도망갈 것이다)통과할 것이다

COMMENT: The great Monarchie of the great Fisherman (St. Peter) is the Church. The young, black, red is a young cardinal from Africa who shall be elected as the pope during the difficult time of the Church. Italian traitors shall betray the papacy and Rome.

VI.26 The Church's Doctrine and Tradition shall be abandoned by a sensual pope.
      교회의 교리와 성전은 음탕한 교황으로 인해 버려질 것이다.

Quartre ans le siege quelque peu bien tiendra
Un surviendra libidineux de vie
Ravenne et Pise, Veronne soustiendront
Pour elever la croix du Pape envie

NOTE:
Quartre: four; siege: seat, papacy; quelque peu: somewhat; tiendra (tenir): to hold, tenure; surviendra (survivre): to survive; live on; libidineux: (latin = libidinosus) licentious, sensuous; soustiendront (soutenir): to support; elever: to elevate; croix: cross; pape: pope; envie: envy; faire envie: to be tempting.

He shall keep the papacy somewhat good for four years
그는 (얼마되지 않는;얼마간) 4년동안 충분하게 교황자리를 지킬 것이다
Then shall live on a licentious life
그 다음에 방탕한(음탕한) 삶으로 지낼(살) 것이다.
Ravenne, Pise, and Veronne shall support him
Ravenne, Pise, 그리고 Veronne는 그를 지지할 것이다
By elevating the cross according to the pope's temptation
교황의 유혹에 의한 십자가를 들어 올림으로(?)

COMMENT: This (anti-)pope is the one mentioned in the preceding quatrain VI.25. The Church's holy Doctrine shall be abandoned and modified to fit his sensual lifestyle. Among them shall be the vow of priestly celibacy.

V.38 The vow of priestly celibacy shall be abolished.
     성직자다운 독신주의의 서약은 폐지될 것이다.

Ce grand monarque qu'an mort succedera
Donnera vie illicite et lubrique
Par nonchalance a tous concedera
Qu'a la parfin faudra la loi Salique

NOTE:
Ce: this ,that; succedera (succeder): to succeed; mort: dead; donner: to enjoy greatly; illicite: illicit, unlawful; lubrique: lewd, lecherous; nonchalance: carelessness; a tous: completely; concedera: to concede; parfin: the end; faudra (falloir): shall need; loi: law; Salique: certain tribes of ancient Frank, based on Salian code of laws, allowed only male heirs to have succession to certain lands and excluded females chiefly because certain military duties which were connected with the holdings of those lands.Here this means the vow of celibacy and male priesthood.

A great monarch shall succeed a dead one
위대한 지배자는 죽은자의 뒤를 계승하리라
Shall enjoy an illicit and lewd life-style
불법과 음란한 생활을 즐기리라
Carelessly, to all, he shall concede all
부주의하게, 모두에게, 그는 모든 것을 승인하리라
At the end of his tenure, Salic law shall be needed
그의 재직의 끝에, 살릭 법이 필요하게 되리라

살릭 법 : ?

COMMENT: An anti-pope shall reign and conduct a sinful life-style. He shall yield to the pressure from the heretics and the enemies of the Church , eventually shall abolish the vow of priestly celibacy and male priesthood.

IV. 40 The great Schism and religious persecution.
       거대한 분열과 종교적 박해

Les forteresses des assiegez serrez
Par poudre a feu profondes en abysme
Les proditeurs seront tous vifs serrez
Onc aux Sacristes n'advint si piteux scisme

NOTE:
Forteress: fortress, stronghold; assieger: besiege; serrez: enclosed, constricted; poudre: gun powder; profond: deep, dark; abysme: abyss; proditeur: (latin = proditor) traitor; onc: ever, never; sacriste: mild expletive expressing of indignation, here means religious dissents; advint (advenir): to happen; scisme: schism.

The stronghold of the besieged shall be enclosed
포위된(의) 근거지(요새)는 에워싸이게 되리라
By gun powder and fierce fire of the abyss
화약과 사나운 지옥의 불은
The traitors shall all be engulfed
반역자를 모두 삼키리라
Never before that the dissents cause such pitiful schism
그 이전에 없는 의견 차이가 그러한 비참한 분열의 원인이 된다

COMMENT: The Eastern invaders shall gain upperhand initially. The dissent clergy shall be persecuted after they cause a great Schism in the Church.

V.46 The Schism and Albania attacks Rome.
     분열, 그리고 알바니아는 로마를 공격한다.

Par chappeaux rouges querelles et nouveaux scismes
Quand on aura eleu le Sabinois
On produira contre lui grands sophismes
Et sera Rome lesee par Albanois

NOTE:
Chapeaux: hats; rouge: red; querell: quarrel; nouveaux: new; scisme: schism; on: one; Sabinois: Sabine, one of ancient people who lived in central Italy; produira: produce; contre: contrary; lui: him, to him; sophisme: fallacious argument; lesee (leser): to injure, to wrong; Albanois: Albanie.

Due to the quarrel between cardinals and new schism
추기경과 분파(새로운 분열)와의 말다툼에
While one elects an Italian pope
한편 사람들은 이탈리아인인 교황을 선출한다
One shall produce the result contrary to their fallacious arguments
사람들은 그들의 그릇된 주장으로 반대의 결과를 얻는다
And Rome shall be harmed by Albanians
그리고 로마는 알바니아인으로 손해를 입는다

COMMENT: The Schism shall take place when an Italian pope shall be selected to succeed Pope John Paul II. Then Rome shall be invaded by Albanians.

IV.29 The martyrdom of Christians and the true Church goes underground.
       그리스도교도의 수난과 참된 교회는 지하로 숨는다.

Oui sous terre saint d'ame voix fainte
Humain flamme pour divine voir luire
Ferra des seuls de leur sang terre tainte
Et les saint temples pour les impure destruire

NOTE:
Oui (ouir); heard; sous: under; terre: ground; saint: holy; ame: soul; voix: voice, sound; fainte: faint; luire: to shine, glisten; voir: to see, behold; seul: by themselves, of their own; taint: stained; leur: their; destruire: to destroy.

Underground holy saints' faint voices are heard
지하의 신성한 성자의 가냘픈 목소리가 들려온다
Human flames shine as the Divine witnesses
사람들은 신의 증거들처럼 빛을 타오르게 하며
By their own blood, the ground is stained
그들의 고유한 피로, 땅은 얼룩지게 된다
And the holy temples shall be destroyed by the impure
그리고 신성한 교회는 불순한 자들로 파괴되어질 것이다

COMMENT: Christians shall be martyred as the enemies of the Church invade Europe and Rome. The true Church shall go underground as the heretics shall be installed in Rome by the Eastern forces.

I.52 Like the Crucified Lord, the Church shall have her own passion and crucifixion.
    십자가에 못받힌 예수처럼, 교회는 교녀의 고유한 고통과 고난(십자가에 못박힘)을
    가지게 될 것이다.

Les deux malin de Scorpion conjoint
Le Grand Seigneur meurtry dedans sa salle
Peste a l'Eglise par le nouveau Roy joints
L'Europe basse et Septentrioanle

NOTE:
Malin: evil; scorpion: army of God's Justice (see Joel and Apocalypse); conjoint: united, joined; Grand Seigneur or Notre Seigneur: Our Lord Jesus; meurtry (tout meurtri): covered with bruises; dedans: inside; salle: hall, Roman praetorium; peste: plague; l'Eglise: the Church; joint: joined, connected; basse: lowered, debassed, humbled; septentrioanle: anagram of "serpent-et-lion", the lion beast begot by the ancient serpent mentioned in Daniel 7:4 which entices sins of flesh through feminism, sex, pornography, etc.

Two evil armies shall join forces to carry out the Divine Justice
둘의 악의 군대들이 신의 심판을 수행하기 위해 힘을 합치리라
Like the Crucified Lord being scourged at the Roman praetorium
로마 치안소(치안관의 사무소?)에서 십자가에 못박힌 예수가 채찍질 당한 것처럼
His Mystical Body the Church shall be put through her own passion by an Italian king
그의 신비한 몸으로 교회는 이탈리아 왕으로 인해 그녀의 고유한 고통을 받을 것이다
Europe shall become debassed and belong to the lioness beast of fornication
유럽은 (품위가) 떨어지고 우상 숭배의 암사자 짐승(AntiChrist)의 소유가 될 것이다

IV.49 "My God, my God, why hast thou abandon me?"
       "신이시어, 신이시어, 왜 당신은 나를 버리려 합니까?"

Devant le peuple sang sera respandu
Que du haut ciel ne viendra eslongner
Mais d'un long temps ne sera entendu
L'esprit d'un seul le viendra tesmoigner

NOTE:
Devant: before, ahead; respandu: poured out, spilled; haut: high, haughty; eslongner: to come alongside; mais: but; entendu: be understood, be heard; seul: alone, on one'sown, tesmoingner: to bear witness, to prove.

Before the crowd, blood shall be shed
군중의 앞에서, 피는 흘려지게 되리라
While the high Heaven seems abandoning mankind
높은 하늘이 인간을 버리는 것처럼 보이는 동안
And Heavenly Voice shall not be heard for a long time
그리고 천국의 음성은 오랜 시간동안 들리지 않게 되리라
One shall rely on his spirit alone
사람들은 홀로 그의 정신(영혼)만을 의지하리라

V.73 The Church shall be chastised by God including Poland.
      폴란드를 포함하여 교회는 신으로부터 벌을 받을 것이다.

Persecutee de Dieu sera l"Eglise
Et les saint temples seront expoliez
L'enfant, la mere mettre nud en chemise
Seront Arabes aux Polons ralliez

NOTE:
Dieu: God; l'Eglise: the Church; saint temple: holy temple; expoliez: exposed, abandoned; enfant: infant; mere: mother; chemise: blouse, Polons: Pologne or Poland; ralliez (raler): to rage.

The Church shall be chastised by God
교회는 신에게 벌을 받을 것이다
And the holy temples shall be exposed
그리고 신성한 성전(예류살렘의 여호와 신전)은 위험에 드러나게 될 것이다
An infant pulls up the shirt(blouse) of his lifeless mother to nurse
유아는 그의 생명없는 어머니의 웃옷이 간호사에게로 전해지는 것을 제지하리라(?)
Arabians (Muslims) shall rage in Poland
아라비아 사람들(이슬람교도)은 폴란드에서 분노할 것이다(날뛸 것이다)

COMMENT: For her defiance against God, the Church shall be chastised. The once devout Catholic countries such as Poland, France, and Italy shall be inflicted the most through barbarian hands.

VIII.98 The Church's Martyrdom or passion.
       교회의 수난과 (정신적)고통

Des gens d'Eglise sang sera expanche
Comme de l'eau en si grand abondance
Et d'un long temps ne sera restranche
Veue au clerc ruine et doleance

NOTE:
Gens: race, people; Eglise: the Church; espanche (epancher): to shed, overflow; comme: like; eau: water; temps: time; restranche (retrncher): to curtail, cut off, suppress; veue (voir): seen; clerc: cleric; doleance: grievance, complaint.

From the members of the Church blood shall be overflown
교회의 회원들(구성원들)로부터 피가 넘치게 될 것이다
Like water flowing with great abundance
물이 가득히 흐르는 것 같이
And for a long time shall not be suppressed
그리고 오랜동안 (피는) 멈추지 못할 것이다
Seen are cleric ruin and grievance
보여지는 것(?)은 성직자의 파멸 그리고 불평이다

COMMENT: Christians including clergy shall be persecuted greatly during the World War which shall last about 27 - 30 years. Like Christ the Head of the Church, His Mystical Body or the Church shall have to go through her own passion.

V.15 Upon sailing, the great Pontiff shall be captured.
     항해 중에, 위대한 교황이 붙잡힐 것이다.

En navigant catif pris grand pontif
Grands apprestez saillir les clers tumultuez
Second eleu absent son bien debile
Son favory bastard a mort tue

NOTE:
Navigant: sailing; pris: caught, taken; apprestez (aprete): bitterness; saillir: to bring out, stand out; eleu: elected; debile: weak, feeble, (n.) mental defective; favori: favorite; tue (tuer): to kill, slaughter.

Upon sailing the great pontiff shall be captured
항해 중에 위대한 교황은 붙잡히게 될 것이다
The tumultuous clergy shall bring out great bitter division
동요한 성직자들은 큰 쓰라린 분열을 (세상에)나타낼 것이다
Second is elected as the chosen is so feeble and absent
두 번째는 너무나 연약하고 불참이 있는 선택으로 선출되게 될 것이다(?)
His favorite bastard is put to death
그의 좋아하는 서자(사생아)는 죽음을 당하게 된다

COMMENT: The great pontiff here might be the one who reign at the end of the World War before the period of peace. He shall be remembered as the peace-maker.

V.44 The pope, the peace-maker, shall be kidnapped.
      조정자(중재인)인 교황은 납치당하게 될 것이다

Par mer le rouge sera pris des pirates
La paix sera par son moyen troublee
L'ire et l'aure commettra par saint acte
Au grand pontif sera l'armee doublee

NOTE:
Paix: peace; moyen: means, way, middle, intermediator; ire: wrath, anger; aure (aureole): halo; commettre: to commend to; armee: army.

In the sea the red hat shall be captured by pirates
바다에서 붉은 모자는 해적들에 의해 붙잡히게 된다
Peace through his mediation shall be in trouble
그의 중재를 통한 평화는 문제에 놓이게 될 것이다
Wrath and veneration shall be commenced through saintly act
분노 그리고 존경은 성도다운 행동으로 시작되어지게 된다
Around the great pontiff the army shall be doubled
위대한 교황 주위에 군대가 두 배가 되어질 것이다

COMMENT: This is the great pope who was mentioned in the preceding quatrain.

PART III:


V.96 The Apparitions of Blessed Virgin Mary prophesied.
     축복받은 동정녀 성모 마리아의 환영이 예언된다.

Sur le millieu du grand monde la rose
Pour nouveaux faits sang public espandu
A dire vrai on aura bouche close
Lors au besoin tard viendra l'attendu

NOTE:
Sur le milieu: in the middle...; monde: the world; rose: here Mystical Rose, one of many titles of the Mother of God; nouveaux: renewed, new; fait: act, action, deed, here faith; sang: blood; espandu (espacer): to spread; a dire vrai: to tell the truth; on: one, people; bouche: mouth; close: closed, shut; besoin: a need, hunger, thrist; tard: late; viendra: shall come; attendu: expected, awaited for.

In the middle of the world is the Mystical Rose
세계의 중심에 신비한 장미가 있다
For the renewal blood shall be shed publicly 
일신을 위하여 피는 공공연하게 흘려지게 될 것이다
One shall be condemed for telling the Truth
사람들은 진실을 말함을 비난할(책망할) 것이다
Then the thirst as the awaited one (Messiah) shall be late in coming
그 다음에 누군가(구세주)를 기다렸던 것 같은 갈증은 도래에 늦을 것이다

COMMENT: Before He imposes His Judgment upon us, God sent His Mother, the Blessed Virgin, to guide us back to Him. We now live in the Marian era which shall be followed by the terrible period of Chastisements which is necessary for the purification of the Church.

II.27 Garabandal: God's Mercy or the Divine Illumination upon man's soul.
      Garabandal(가라반달) : 신의 자비 또는 인간의 영혼의 신의 계몽.

Le divin verbe sera du ciel frappe
Qui ne pourra proceder plus avant
Du reserant le secret estoupe
Qu'on marchera par dessus et devant

NOTE:
Divine Verbe: the Word of God, the Lord Jesus Christ; frapper: to strike; proceder: to proceed; plus: more; avant: further, ahead; reserant (reserver): to reserve; marche: to walk; par dessus et devant: back and forth.

The Word of God from Heaven strikes
하늘로무터의 신의 복음이 마음에 떠오르게 된다
One shall not proceed further
사람들은 더 깊이(멀리) 나아가지 못할 것이다
Buried within, the secrets shall be exposed
속에 뭍혀, 비밀이 드러나게 될 것이다
One shall run back and forth in panic
사람들은 공포로 뒤와 앞으로 도망가게 될 것이다

COMMENT: There shall be a worlwide, universal Warning from God to all His sinful creatures. Every activity shall stop mometarily so one can examine his conscience and his past in the Presence of God. All the secrets buried deeply in one's heart shall be revealed. This event is like a minor judgment. Afterwards the whole world shall become bewildered and panicked.

II.92 Garabandal: The Miracle and the Final Sign.
     Garabandal : 기적과 마지막 이적.

Feu, couleur d'or de ciel en terre veu
Frappe du haut n'ay, fait cas merveilleux
Grand meutre humain, prise du grand veveu
Morts d'expectacles, eschappe l'orgueilleux

NOTE:
Veu: viewed; frapper: to impress, surprise; naitre: to be born; haut: haughty; cas: case,event; meutre: massacre, murder; veveu (veuve): (plur. of veuf) widow; expectacle (spectacle): show, exhibition, here witness; orgueilleux: proud, haughty.

Column of fire , shining like gold from the sky to the earth
불의 기둥, 하늘에서 땅으로 황금과 같은 빛
Dumb-founded is the haughty, a marvelous event
어쩔줄 몰라함은 오만함, 믿기 어려운 사건이다(?)
Great human massacre, great affliction to many widows
크나큰 인간 대학살, 미망인들의 불행의 원인
Death of witnesses, the proud shall escape death
증거(증인)의 죽음, 자존심(긍지?)은 죽음을 벗어나게 될 것이다

COMMENT: Before the persecution and martyrdom of many believers and much blood shed, God shall give mankind an unusual sign in the form of heavenly fire stretching from the sky to the earth, a miraculous event which cannot be explained by haughty scientists.

III.2 Praises to our Lord Jesus Christ.
     우리의 왕 예수 그리스도에게 찬미하라.

Le divine verbe pourra a la substance
Comprins ciel, terre, or occult au fait mystique
Corps, ame, esprit ayant tout puissance
Tant soubs ses pieds comme au siege Celique

NOTE:
Verbe: le Verbe means the Word of God; pourra (pourrir): to rot, debase, become inferior; or: gold; occult: hidden, secret; fait: action, deed, feat; corp: body; ame: soul, ayant (avoir): to have, possess; puissance: power; tant: so, so many; soubs (soubassement): pedestal, lower portion; ses: his; pied: foot, leg; comme: as siege: seat, chair; Celique (Cielique): Heavenly.

The Divine Word turns into Substance
신의 복음은 신성(실체?)으로 변하리라
Heaven, earth, and hidden treasure all involve in this mystical event
하늘, 땅, 그리고 숨겨진 보물은 모두 신비한 사건에 말려들 것이다
In Body, Soul, Spirit, He is almighty
몸, 영혼, 정신에 그는 전능하게 된다
Upon His Footstool as in His Heavenly Throne
그의 발판 위로 그의 하늘의 왕처럼

COMMENT: Nostradamus sang praise to the Lord.

IX. 12 The Potter and His Clay.
       도공과 그의 점토.

Le tant d'argent de Diane et Mercure
Les simulacres au lac seront trouvez
Le figulier cherchant argille neuve
Lui et les siens, d'or seront abbreuvez

NOTE:
Tant: so much; tant d'argent: so much silver, here means thunder or lightning; Diane: (fig.) Blessed Virgin Mary; Mercure: (fig.) God's Chastisements; simulacre: image, phantom; lac: lake (of fire); trouver: to find, discover; figulier: potter; cherchant (chercher): to seek; argile: clay; neuve: new; lui: him; sien: his; or: gold; abbreuvez (abreuver): to water, to fill up.

Warning from Blessed Virgin and Thunder of God's Justice
축복받은 동정녀와 신의 심판의 번개로부터의 경고
Phantoms (souls) shall be found in the lake of fire
유령(영혼)은 불의 호수에서 찾게 되리라
The Potter shall seek new Clay
도공은 새로운 진흙을 찾을 것이다
Him and His ( children ) shall be full of golden glory
그를 그리고 그의 (아이들)은 황금빛의 영광으로 가득하게 될 것이다

COMMENT: Blessed Mary was sent from heaven to warn mankind about the coming perils. Many shall die and their souls shall be in eternal hell-fire. The Lord (Potter) purifies and renew the earth with a new race (Clay).

VI.78 "At the end, my Immaculate Heart shall triumph..."
      "끝에, 내 완전한 마음(심장)은 승리하리라..."

Crier victoire du grand Selin croissant
Par les Romains sera l'Aigle clame
Ticcin, Milan et Gennes ny consent
Puis par eux memes Basil grand reclame

NOTE:
Crier: cry; Selin: (Greek) moon, (fig.) Blessed Virgin; Romains: (fig.) faithful Christians, her faithful children; Aigle: eagle, (fig.) the Gospel of St. John ; clame (clamer): to proclaim; puis: then, afterwards; eux: them; memes: same; basil: (Greek) king; reclame: to claim, to demand.

The triumphant cry shall belong to the Blessed Virgin
승리를 얻은 울음(기쁨의 눈물)은 축복받은 동정녀의 것이 되리라
Through the help of her faithful children, St. John's Gospel shall be proclaimed
그녀의 충실한 아이들의 도움으로, 성자 존의 복음은 선언될 것이다
Ticcin, Milan, and Genoa still disconsent
Ticcin, Milan, 그리고 Genoa는 여전히 반대한다
Afterwards through them (Italians), the King of kings shall reclaim
후에 그들(이탈리아인들)로 통하여, 왕들 중의 왕은 교화되리라

COMMENT: This quatrain reflects the prophecies in Chapter 12 of Apocalypse.

VIII.95 The golden period of peace.
        평화의 황금같은 기간

Le seducteur sera mis dans la fosse
Et estache jusques a quelque temps
Le clerc uni, le chef avec sa crosse
Pycante droite attraira les contens

NOTE:
Seducteur: the Seducer, Satan; mis: placed; fosse: pit; estache (attache): tied up; jusque: till , up to; quelque: some; clerc: clergy; uni: united; pycante: to pick; droite: straight, upright; attraira (attrait): attract; contens: dissent, heretic.

The Seducer shall be put in the pit
유혹자(색마)는 지옥(구멍)에 던져지게 되리라
And tied up for some time
그리고 약간의 시간동안 단단히 묶이게 되리라
Clergy united, the temporal leader with the Cross
성직자들은 연합하게 되며, 십자가를 든 일시적인 지도자
Choosing the right shall attract the dissents
옳음을 선택은 의견차이를 당기게 될 것이다(좁히게 될 것이다)

COMMENT: God shall bind Satan in the dungeon for a while during the period of peace and the antichrist shall come. Temporal rulers shall become Christians who are supportive and obedient to the Holy See. 

