                                      II.                                    
                            POEMS EARLY ABANDONED.                           
                                                                            
 During  his  time  at the  University of  Leeds my  father embarked  on five
 distinct  poetical works  concerned with  the matter  of the  mythology; but
 three of these went no further than the openings.  This chapter  treats each
 of them in turn.                                                            
                                                                            
                        (i) The Flight of the Noldoli.                       
  There do not seem to be any certain indications of the date of this brief
  poem in alliterative verse in relation to The Children of Hurin (though it
   is worth noticing that already in the earliest of the three texts of The
    Flight of the Noldoli Feanor's son Cranthir is so named, whereas this
   form only arose by emendation of Cranthor in the typescript text of the
    Lay (line 1719)). However, both from its general air and from various
 details it can be seen that it comes from the same time; and since it seems
    unlikely that (on the one hand) my father would have embarked on a new
  poem in alliterative verse unless he had laid the other aside, or that (on
   the other) he would have returned to this mode once he was fully engaged
      on a long poem in rhyming couplets, I think it very probable that      
      The Flight of the Noldoli comes from the earlier part of 1925 (see     
                                                                            
 PP. 3, 81).                                                                 
  Each of the three  manuscripts of  the poem  (A, B,  and C)  is differently
 titled:  A  has  The  Flight  of  the  Gnomes  as  sung  in  the   Halls  of
 Thingol;  B  (pencilled  in later)  Flight of  the Gnomes;  C The  Flight of
 the  Noldoli  from  Valinor.  A  has emendations  that are  taken up  in the
 text of B, and B has emendations taken up in C; almost all  are characteris-
 tic metrical/verbal rearrangements, as for example in line 17:              
                                                                            
  A in anguish mourning, emended to the reading of B;                        
  B and in anguish mourn, emended to the reading of C;                       
  C mourning in anguish.                                                     
                                                                            
  As  generally  in  this  book,  earlier  variants that  have no  bearing on
 names or story are not cited. Each text ends  at the  same point,  but three
 further lines are roughly written in the margin of A (see note to line 146).
  I give now the text of the third version, C.                               

                THE FLIGHT OF THE NOLDOLI                    
                       FROM VALINOR.                         
                                                            
 A! the Trees of Light, tall and shapely,                    
 gold and silver, more glorious than the sun,                
 than the moon more magical, o'er the meads of the Gods      
 their fragrant frith and flowerladen                        
 gardens gleaming, once gladly shone.                      5
 In death they are darkened, they drop their leaves          
 from blackened branches bled by Morgoth                     
 and Ungoliant the grim the Gloomweaver.                     
 In spider's form despair and shadow                         
 a shuddering fear and shapeless night                   10 
 she weaves in a web of winding venom                        
 that is black and breathless. Their branches fail,          
 the light and laughter of their leaves are quenched.        
 Mirk goes marching, mists of blackness,                     
 through the halls of the Mighty hushed and empty,       15
 the gates of the Gods are in gloom mantled.                 
                                                            
 Lo! the Elves murmur mourning in anguish,                   
 but no more shall be kindled the mirth of Cor               
 in the winding ways of their walled city,                   
 towercrowned Tun, whose twinkling lamps                 20
 are drowned in darkness. The dim fingers                    
 of fog come floating from the formless waste                
 and sunless seas. The sound of horns,                       
 of horses' hooves hastening wildly                          
 in hopeless hunt, they hear afar,                       25
 where the Gods in wrath those guilty ones                   
 through mournful shadow, now mounting as a tide             
 o'er the Blissful Realm, in blind dismay                    
 pursue unceasing. The city of the Elves                     
 is thickly thronged. On threadlike stairs               30
 carven of crystal countless torches                         
 stare and twinkle, stain the twilight                       
 and gleaming balusters of green beryl.                      
 A vague rumour of rushing voices,                           
 as myriads mount the marble paths,                       35
 there fills and troubles those fair places                  
 wide ways of Tun and walls of pearl.                        
                                                            
 Of the Three Kindreds to that clamorous throng              

 are none but the Gnomes in numbers drawn.               
 The Elves of Ing to the ancient halls                 40
 and starry gardens that stand and gleam                 
 upon Timbrenting towering mountain                      
 that day had climbed to the cloudy-domed                
 mansions of Manwe for mirth and song.                   
 There Bredhil the Blessed the bluemantled,            45
 the Lady of the heights as lovely as the snow           
 in lights gleaming of the legions of the stars,         
 the cold immortal Queen of mountains,                   
 too fair and terrible too far and high                  
 for mortal eyes, in Manwe's court                     50
 sat silently as they sang to her.                       
                                                        
 The Foam-riders, folk of waters,                        
 Elves of the endless echoing beaches,                   
 of the bays and grottoes and the blue lagoons,          
 of silver sands sown with moonlit,                    55
 starlit, sunlit, stones of crystal,                     
 paleburning gems pearls and opals,                      
 on their shining shingle, where now shadows groping     
 clutched their laughter, quenched in mourning           
 their mirth and wonder, in amaze wandered             60
 under cliffs grown cold calling dimly,                  
 or in shrouded ships shuddering waited                  
 for the light no more should be lit for ever.           
                                                        
 But the Gnomes were numbered by name and kin,           
 marshalled and ordered in the mighty square           65
 upon the crown of Cor. There cried aloud                
 the fierce son of Finn. Flaming torches                 
 he held and whirled in his hands aloft,                 
 those hands whose craft the hidden secret               
 knew, that none Gnome or mortal                       70
 hath matched or mastered in magic or in skill.          
 'Lo! slain is my' sire by the sword of fiends,          
 his death he has drunk at the doors of his hall         
 and deep fastness, where darkly hidden                  
 the Three were guarded, the things unmatched          75
 that Gnome and Elf and the Nine Valar                   
 can never remake or renew on earth,                     
 recarve or rekindle by craft or magic,                  
 not Feanor Finn's son who fashioned them of yore -      

 the light is lost whence he lit them first,         80
 the fate of Faerie hath found its hour                  
                                                        
 Thus the witless wisdom its reward hath earned          
 of the Gods' jealousy, who guard us here                
 to serve them, sing to them in our sweet cages,         
 to contrive them gems and jewelled trinkets,        85
 their leisure to please with our loveliness,            
 while they waste and squander work of ages,             
 nor can Morgoth master in their mansions sitting        
 at countless councils. Now come ye all,                 
 who have courage and hope! My call harken           90
 to flight, to freedom in far places!                    
 The woods of the world whose wide mansions              
 yet in darkness dream drowned in slumber,               
 the pathless plains and perilous shores                 
 no moon yet shines on nor mounting dawn             95
 in dew and daylight hath drenched for ever,             
 far better were these for bold footsteps                
 than gardens of the Gods gloom-encircled                
 with idleness filled and empty days.                    
 Yea! though the light lit them and the loveliness   100
 beyond heart's desire that hath held us slaves          
 here long and long. But that light is dead.             
 Our gems are gone, our jewels ravished;                 
 and the Three, my Three, thrice-enchanted               
 globes of crystal by gleam undying                  105
 illumined, lit by living splendour                      
 and all hues' essence, their eager flame -              
 Morgoth has them in his monstrous hold,                 
 my Silmarils. I swear here oaths,                       
 unbreakable bonds to bind me ever,                  110
 by Timbrenting and the timeless halls                   
 of Bredhil the Blessed that abides thereon -            
 may she hear and heed - to hunt endlessly               
 unwearying unwavering through world and sea,            
 through leaguered lands, lonely mountains,          115
 over fens and forest and the fearful snows,             
 till I find those fair ones, where the fate is hid      
 of the folk of Elfland and their fortune locked,        
 where alone now lies the light divine.'                 
                                                        
 Then his sons beside him, the seven kinsmen,        120

 crafty Curufin, Celegorm the fair,                                  
 Damrod and Diriel and dark Cranthir,                                
 Maglor the mighty, and Maidros tall                                 
 (the eldest, whose ardour yet more eager burnt                      
 than his father's flame, than Feanor's wrath;                 125
 him fate awaited with fell purpose),                                
 these leapt with laughter their lord beside,                        
 with linked hands there lightly took                                
 the oath unbreakable; blood thereafter                              
 it spilled like a sea and spent the swords                    130
 of endless armies, nor hath ended yet:                              
                                                                    
 'Be he friend or foe or foul offspring                              
 of Morgoth Bauglir, be he mortal dark                               
 that in after days on earth shall dwell,                            
 shall no law nor love nor league of Gods,                     135
 no might nor mercy, not moveless fate,                              
 defend him for ever from the fierce vengeance                       
 of the sons of Feanor, whoso seize or steal                         
 or finding keep the fair enchanted                                  
 globes of crystal whose glory dies not,                       140
 the Silmarils. We have sworn for ever! '                            
                                                                    
 Then a mighty murmuring was moved abroad                            
 and the harkening host hailed them roaring:                         
 'Let us go! yea go from the Gods for ever                           
 on Morgoth's trail o'er the mountains of the world             145
 to vengeance and victory! Your vows are ours!                       
                                                                    
 The poem ends here (but see note to line 146).                      
                                                                    
                                       *                             
                                                                    
                                     NOTES.                          
                                                                    
   41. starry gardens C, starlit domes A, B.
   42. Tengwethil's A (with Timbrenting written in margin), Tim-
           brenting's B, Timbrenting C (with Taingwethil written in
   margin). See note to The Children of Hurin (second version) line
   812.
   45. Bridhil A, B, C, emended in C to Bredhil; so also at line 112.
   107. and all hues' essence: this half-line (in the form all hue's

       essence) occurs also in the second version of The Children of        
        Hurin, line 381, where it is said of the Silmaril of Beren.           
  111.  Tengwethil A, Timbrenting B, C.                                      
  134. that in after days on earth shall dwell: this line bracketed            
        later in pencil in C.                                                 
  146. There are three roughly-written lines in the margin of the last page
        of A which were not taken up in B and C, but which presumably         
        follow on line 146:                                                   
                                                                             
                  But Finweg cried Fingolfin's son                            
                  when his father found that fair counsel,                    
                  that wit and wisdom were of worth no more:                  
                  'Fools                                                      
                                                                             
                    Commentary on The Flight of the Noldoli.                  
                                                                             
  Sad as it is that this poem was  abandoned so  soon -  when in  full mastery
  of  the  alliterative  line  my  father might  have gone  on to  recount the
  Kinslaying of Alqualonde, the  Prophecy of  the North,  the crossing  of the
  Helcaraxe, and the burning of  the ships,  there is  nonetheless in  its few
  lines  much of  interest for  the study  of the  development of  the legend.
  Most notably, there here appears the  earliest version  of the  actual words
  of the Feanorian Oath. The Oath was first  referred to  in the  outlines for
  Gilfanon's Tale (I. 238, 240):                                              
                                                                             
    The  Seven  Sons  of Feanor  swore their  terrible oath  of hatred  for ever
    against all, Gods or Elves or Men, who should hold the Silmarils          
                                                                             
  but it was there sworn after the coming of the Elves from Valinor, and after
  the death of Feanor. In the  present poem  is the  first appearance  of the.
  story  that  the  Oath  was  taken in  Valinor before  the departure  of the
  Gnomes.  It  has  also  been  referred to  in The  Children of  Hurin, lines
  631 ff.  of the  first version,  where it  is implied  that the  mountain of
  Tain-Gwethil was taken in witness - as it was in  The Silmarillion  (p. 83):
  here (line i x x) Feanor himself swears  by Timbrenting  that he  will never
  cease to hunt for the Silmarils.                                            
     I cannot explain why line 134                                            
                                                                             
                    that in after days on earth shall dwell                   
                                                                             
  was bracketed (always a mark  of exclusion  or at  least of  doubtful reten-
  tion) in the C-text.  The line  reappears in  identical form  in the  Lay of
  Leithian  (Canto  VI,  1636);  cf.  The  Silmarillion  'Vala, Demon,  Elf or
  Man as yet unborn'.                                                         
     The fixed epithets  of certain  of the  Sons of  Feanor are  changed from
  those in  The Children  of Hurin  (see p.  86): Celegorm  is now  'the fair'
  and Maidros 'the tall', as  thev remained;  Maglor is  'the mighty'  (in The
  Silmarillion 'the mighty singer'). The line concerning Maidros              

            
                                                                             
 him fate awaited with fell purpose  (126)                                     
                                                                             
 may show that a form of the  story of  his end  was already  in being  (in the
 Tale  of  the  Nauglafring  he  survived  the  attack  on  Dior  the  Fair but
 nothing more is told of him), but I think it much more  likely that  it refers
 to his capture and maiming by Morgoth.                                       
  In  Feanor's   speech  occur   two  interesting   references:  to   the  Nine
 Valar,  and  to his  father Finn.  The number  of the  Valar is  nowhere stated
 in  the  Lost  Tales  (where  in  any  case  the  name includes  lesser divine
 beings; cf. e.g. I. 65 - 6 'With them came  many of  those lesser  Vali... the
 Manir and the Suruli, the  sylphs of  the airs  and of  the winds');  but 'the
 Nine  Valar'  are  referred to  in the  'Sketch of  the Mythology'  (1926) and
 named  in  the  1930   'Silmarillion'.  Manwe,   Ulmo,  Osse,   Aule,  Mandos,
 Lorien, Tulkas, Orome, and Melko.                                            
  Feanor's  father  has  not  been  named  since  the  tale  of  The  Theft  of
 Melko  and  the  Darkening  of  Valinor  (I.  145 ff.),  where he  was called
 Bruithwir,  slain  by  Melko.   In  ?he   Children  of   Hurin  there   is  no
 indication  that  Feanor  was akin  to other  princes of  the Gnomes  - though
 there can be no doubt that by that time he in fact was  so. But  the essential
 features of the  Noldorin royal  house as  it had  now emerged  and as  it was
 to  remain for  many years  can now  be deduced.  In the first version  of The
 Children  of  Hurin  (line  29  and  note)  Turgon  was   the  son   of  Finwe
 (actually spelt Finweg), as he had  been in  the Lost  Tales (I.  115), but
 this was changed  to Finwe's  heir, with  the note  'he was  Fingolfin's son';
 and  in  the  second  version  Turgon  the mighty,  IFingolfin's son  is found
 in the text as written (48 - 9). We thus have:                               
                                                                             
                                 Finwe (Finweg)                               
                               |                                             
                           Fingolfin                                          
                                                                             
                        Turgon                                               
                                                                             
 Further, Finweg  appears in  The Children of  Hurin (first  version 1975,
 second  version 19, 520) as  the King  of the  Gnomes who  died in  the Battle
 of  Unnumbered  Tears;  in  two  of  these  cases the  name was  later changed
 to Fingon.  In the  lines added  at the  end of  the A-text  of The  Flight of
 the  Noldoli  (note  to  line 146) Finweg  is Fingolfin's  son. We  can there-
 fore add:                                                                    
                                                                             
                                 Finwe (Finweg)                               
                                                                             
                               I                                              
                            Fin lhn                                           
                                                                             
              Finweg                     Turgon                               
          (> Fingon)                                                          

  Now in The Flight of the Noldoli Feanor is called Finn's son; and in the                      
  'Sketch of the Mythology' Finn is given as an alternative to Finwe:                           
                                                                                               
    The Eldar are divided into three  hosts, one  under Ingwe  (Ing)..., one                    
    under Finwe (Finn) after called the Noldoli...*                                             
                                                                                               
  Thus Feanor has become Fingolfin's brother:                                                   
                                                                                               
                                     Finwe (Finweg, Finn)                                       
                                          |                                                     
                                                                                               
                        Feanor                                                                  
                                                                                               
                      Seven sons             Finweg Turgon                                      
                                       (> Fingon)                                               
                                                                                               
  (Only in a later note to lines 1713 - 20 of The Children of Hurin has                         
  Finwe's third son Finrod appeared, father of Felagund, Angrod, Egnor,                         
  and Orodreth.)                                                                                
    Feanor's speech also contains a curious foreknowledge of the making                         
  of the Sun and Moon (92 - 6):                                                                 
                                                                                               
                  The woods of the world whose wide mansions                                    
                  yet in darkness dream drowned in slumber,                                     
                  the pathless plains and perilous shores                                       
                  no moon yet shines on nor mounting dawn                                       
                  in dew and daylight hath drenched for ever                                    
                                                                                               
    Very notable are Feanor's concluding words (117 - 18):                                     
                                                                                               
                  till I find those fair ones, where the fate is hid                            
                  of the folk  of Elfland  and their  fortune locked                            
                                                                                               
  Cf. The Silmarillion, p. 67: 'Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda lay                      
  locked  within  them',  and  Thingol's  words to  Beren (ibid.  p. 167):                      
  'though the fate of Arda lie within the Silmarils, yet you shall hold me                      
  generous'. It is clear that the Silmarils had already gained  greatly in                      
  significance since the earliest period of the mythology (see I. 156, 169                      
  note z; II. 259).                                                                             
    In no other version is Feanor  seen on  this occasion  holding flaming                      
  torches in his hands and whirling them aloft.                                                 
    The lines (38 - g)                                                                          
                                                                                               
                  Of the Three Kindreds to that clamorous throng                                
                  are none but the Gnomes in numbers drawn                                      
                                                                                               
                go back to the tale of The Flight of the Noldoli (I. 162): 'Now when...         
                                                                                               
   (* In the 1930 'Silmarillion' it is expressly stated that Ing and Finn are the Gnomish forms
  of Ingwe and Finwe.)                                                                       

                                                                             
                                                                                 
     Feanor sees that far the most of the company is of the kin of the  Noldor', on
     which I noted (I.  169) 'It  is to  be remembered  that in  the old  story the
     Teleri (i.e.  the later  Vanyar) had  not departed  from Kor.'  Later evidence
     shows  that  the  old  story  had  not  been  changed;  but  the fact  that in
     the   present   poem   the   Elves   of  Ing   (Ingwe)  were   on  Timbrenting
     (Taniquetil)  in  the  mansions  of  Manwe and  Varda shows  the entry  of the
     later narrative (found in the 'Sketch') of  the destruction  of the  Trees. In
     the  old  tale  of  The  Theft  of   Melko  and   the  Darkening   of  Valinor
     (I. 143 ff. and  commentary I.  157) the  great festival  was the  occasion of
     Melko's  attack  on  the  place  of  the   Gnomes'  banishment   northward  in
     Valinor, the slaying of Feanor's father, and the theft  of the  Silmarils; and
     the  destruction  of  the  Trees  followed  some  time  afterwards.  Now  how-
     ever  the  festival is  the occasion  of the  attack on  the Trees;  the First
     Kindred are on Taniquetil but most of the Gnomes are not.                    
       The  name  by  which  Varda  is  here called,  Bridhil the  Blessed (changed
     in  C  to  Bredhil),  is  found  in  the  old  Gnomish  dictionary,  and  also
     Timbridhil   (I.  269,   273,  entries   Tinwetari,  Varda).   On  Timbrenting
     see  p.  127,  where  the  form  Tindbrenting  occurring  in The  Children of
     Hurin (in a note to second  version line  812) is  discussed. Both  forms are
     found in the 'Sketch':                                                       
                                                                                 
        Timbrenting or Tindbrenting in English, Tengwethil in Gnomish,            
        Taniquetil in Elfin.                                                      
                                                                                 
     The form with  -m- is  therefore evidently  due to  a change  of pronunciation
     in English, ndb > mb.                                                        
       In  line  41  the  earlier   reading  starlit   domes,  changed   to  starry
     gardens,  is  probably  to  be  related  to  the  account in  the tale  of The
     Coming  of  the  Valar  and  the   Building  of   Valinor  of   Manwe's  abode
     on Taniquetil (I. 73):                                                       
                                                                                 
        That  house  was  builded  of  marbles  white  and  blue  and stood  amid the
        fields of snow, and its roofs  were made  of a  web of  that blue  air called
        ilwe that  is  above  the  white and  grey. This  web did  Aule and  his wife
        contrive,  but  Varda  spangled  it  with  stars,  and  Manwe   dwelt  there-
        under.                                                                    
                                                                                 
     This idea of a roof lit with stars was never lost and appears in a changed
     form long after, though it is not mentioned in The Silmarillion.             
        The lines (21 - 3)                                                        
                                               The dim fingers                    
                                                                                 
                 of fog came floating from the formless waste                    
                  and sunless seas                                                
                                                                                 
     find an echo in The Silmarillion (p.76):                                     
                                                                                 
        it blew chill from the East in that hour, and the vast shadows of the sea
        were rolled against the walls of the shore.                               

    The lines at the end of the A-text (note  to line  146) show  that Fingolfin
  has  taken  Finwe  Noleme's  place  as  the  voice  of  reason  and moderation
  amid the revolutionary enthusiasm of the Noldoli in the great square of       
  Kor (see I. 162, 171).                                                        
    Lastly  may  be  noticed  the  term 'Foam-riders'  used (line  52) of  the 
  Third Kindred (the Solosimpi of the Lost Tales, later  the Teleri);  this has
  been used once before, in AElfwine of England (II. 3I4), where it is  said 
  of AElfwine's mother Eadgifu that when he was born                            
                                                                               
    the Foamriders, the Elves of the Sea-marge, whom she had known of:          
    old in Lionesse, sent messengers to his birth.                              
                                                                               
                        Analysis of the metre of the poem.                      
                                                                               
  At the end of the second text (B) of  The Flight  of the  Noldoli my  father 
  made an analysis of  the metrical  forms of  the first  20 and  certain subse-
  quent lines. For his analysis and explanation of the Old English metre see
  On Translating Beowulf, in The Monsters and the Critics and Other            
  Essays, 1983, pp. 61 ff.  The letters  A, +  A, B,  C, D,  E on  the left-hand
  side of the table refer to the 'types' of Old  English half-line;  the letters
  beneath the analyses of 'lifts' and 'dips' are  the alliterations  employed in
  each line, with 0 used for any vowel (since all vowels 'alliterate' with each
  other) and X for a  consonant beginning  a lift  but not  forming part  of the
  alliterative scheme of the  line; the  words 'full',  'simple', etc.  refer to
  the nature of the alliterative pattern in each case.                          

     It may be noticed that the scansion of the first half of line 8 (with the
  first lift -goli-) shows that the primary stress fell on the second syllable of
  Ungoliant;  and  that sp  can only  alliterate with  sp (lines  9, 130),  as in
  Old English (the same is of course true of sh, which is a separate            
  consonant).                                                                    
                                                                                
                 (ii) Fragment of an alliterative Lay of Earendel.               
                                                                                
  There exists one other piece of  alliterative verse  concerned with  the matter
  of  the  Lost Tales,  the opening  of a  poem that  has no  title and  does not
  extend  far  enough  to make  clear what  its subject  was to  be. The  fall of
  Gondolin, the escape  of the  fugitives down  the secret  tunnel, the  fight at
  Cristhorn,  and  the  long  wandering  in  the  wilds  thereafter,  are  passed
  over  rapidly  in  what  were  to be  the introductory  lines, and  the subject
  seems about to appear at the end of the fragment:                              
                                                                                
                     all this have others in ancient stories                     
                     and songs unfolded, but say I further...                    
                                                                                
   and the concluding lines  refer to  the sojourn  of the  fugitives in  the Land
   of  Willows.  But  at  the  end  of  the  text  my  father wrote  several times
   in  different  scripts   'Earendel',  'Earendel   son  of   Fengel',  'Earendel
   Fengelsson'; and I think it extremely  likely, even  almost certain,  that this
   poem was to be a Lay of Earendel. (On Fengel see the next section.)           

    The text is  in the  first stage  of composition  and is  exceedingly rough,
  but it contains one line of the utmost interest for  the history  of Earendel.
  It  is  written  on  examination  paper  from  the  University  of  Leeds  and
  clearly  belongs  in  time  with The  Lay of  the Children  of Hurin  and The
  Flight of the Noldoli: more than that seems impossible to say.                   
                                                                                  
    Lo! the flame of fire and fierce hatred                                        
    engulfed Gondolin and its glory fell,                                          
    its tapering towers and its tall rooftops                                      
    were laid all low, and its leaping fountains                                   
    made no music more on the mount of Gwareth,                              5     
    and its whitehewn walls were whispering ash.                                   
    But Wade of the Helsings wearyhearted )                                        
    Tur the earthborn was tried in battle                                          
    from the wrack and ruin a remnant led                                          
    women and children and wailing maidens                                         
    and wounded men of the withered folk                                    10     
    down the path unproven that pierced the hillside,                              
    neath Tumladin he led them to the leaguer of hills                             
    that rose up rugged as ranged pinnacles                                        
    to the north of the vale. There the narrow way                                 
    of Cristhorn was cloven, the Cleft of Eagles,                           IS     
    through the midmost mountains. And more is told                                
    in lays and in legend and lore of others                                       
    of that weary way of the wandering folk;                                       
    how the waifs of Gondolin outwitted Melko,                                     
    vanished o'er the vale and vanquished the hills,                        20     
    how Glorfindel the golden in the gap of the Eagles                             
    battled with the Balrog and both were slain:                                   
    one like flash of fire from fanged rock,                                       
    one like bolted thunder black was smitten                                      
    to the dreadful deep digged by Thornsir.                                25     
    Of the thirst and hunger of the thirty moons                                   
    when they sought for Sirion and were sore bestead                              
    by plague and peril; of the Pools of Twilight                                  
    and Land of Willows; when their lamentation                                    
    was heard in the halls where the high Gods sate                         30 
    veiled in Valinor .. the Vanished Isles;                                       
    all this have others in ancient stories                                        
    and songs unfolded, but say I further                                          
    how their lot was lightened, how they laid them down                           
    in long grasses of the Land of Willows.                                 35     
    There sun was softer, ... the sweet breezes                                    
    and whispering winds, there wells of slumber                                   
    and the dew enchanted                                                          
                                        *                                          

                                    NOTES.                                   
                                                                            
  The next lines are                                                         
                                                                            
                where stony-voiced that stream of Eagles                     
                runs o'er the rocky                                          
                                                                            
  but  the  second  of  these  is struck  out and  the first  left without
  continuation.                                                              
  31. The second  half-line was  written in  the Vanished  Isles, but  in was
      struck out and replaced by a word that I cannot interpret.                 
  36. The  second  half-line  was written  and the  sweet breezes,  but and
      was  struck  out  and  replaced   by  some   other  word,   possibly  then.
                                                                            
                                Commentary.                                  
                                                                            
 For the form Tur see I I. 148, 260.                                         
 In the tale of The Fall of Gondolin  Cristhorn, the  Eagles' Cleft,  was in
 the  Encircling  Mountains  south  of  Gondolin, and  the secret  tunnel led
 southwards  from the  city (II.  167 -  8 etc.);  but from  line 14  of this
 fragment it is seen that the change to the north  had already  entered the
 legend.                                                                     
 Lines  26  -  7  (the  thirty  moons  when  they   sought  for   Sirion)  go
 back to the Fall of Gondolin, where it is said  that the  fugitives wandered
 'a year and more' in the wastes (see II. 195, 214).                       
 The reading of line 7 as first written (it was not struck  out, but  Tur the
 earthborn was tried in battle was added in the margins):                   
                                                                            
                   But Wade of the Helsings wearyhearted                     
                                                                            
 is remarkable. It is taken  directly from  the very  early Old  English poem
 Widsith,  where  occurs  the  line  Wada  Haelsingum,  sc.   Wada  [weold]
 Haelsingum,  'Wada  ruled  the  Haelsingas'.  One  may  well  wonder  why the
 mysterious  figure  of  Wade  should  appear  here  in  Tuor's   place,  and
 indeed I  cannot explain  it: but  whatever the  reason, the  association of
 Wade  with  Tuor  is  not  casual.  Of  the  original  story of  Wade almost
   nothing is known; but he survived in popular recollection through the
   Middle Ages and later - he is mentioned by Malory as a mighty being,      
   and Chaucer refers to 'Wade's boat' in The Merchant's Tale; in Troilus     
   and Crisyede Pandare told a 'tale of Wade'. R. W. Chambers (Widsith,     
   Cambridge 1912, p. 95) said that Wade was perhaps 'originally a sea-      
 giant, dreaded and honoured by the coast tribes of the  North Sea  and the
 Baltic'; and the tribe of the Haelsingas over which he is said to have ruled
 in Widsith is  supposed to  have left  its name  in Helsingor  (Elsinore) in
 Denmark   and   in  Helsingfors   in  Finland.   Chambers  summed   up  what
 few generalities  he  thought might  be made  from the  scattered references
 in English and German as follows:                                         

 We find these common characteristics, which we may assume be-                       
 longed to their ancient prototype, Wada of the Haelsingas:                          
                                                                                    
   (1) Power over the sea.                                                           
   (2) Extraordinary strength - often typified by superhuman stature.                
   (3)  The  use of  these powers  to help  those whom  Wade favours.                
                                                                                    
 ... Probably he grew out of the figure, not of a historic chief, but of a -         
 supernatural power, who had no story all his own, and who interested                
 mortal men only when he interfered in their concerns. Hence he is                   
 essentially a helper in time of need; and we may be fairly confident that           
 already in the oldest lays he possessed this character.                             
                                                                                    
 Most interesting, however, is the fact that in Speght's annotations to              
 Chaucer (1598) he said:                                                             
                                                                                    
 Concerning Wade and his bote Guingelot, as  also his  strange exploits              
 in the same, because the matter is long and fabulous, I passe it over.              
                                                                                    
 The likeness of Guingelot to Wingelot is sufficiently striking; but when            
 we place together the facts that Wingelot was Earendel's ship,* that                
 Earendel was Tuor's son, that Tuor was peculiarly associated with the               
 sea, and that here 'Wade of the Helsings' stands in the place of Tuor,              
 coincidence is ruled out. Wingelot was derived from Wade's boat,                   
 Guingelot as certainly, I think, as was Earendel from the Old English               
 figure (this latter being a fact expressly stated by my father, II. 309).          
 Why my father should have intruded 'Wade of the Helsings' into the,                 
 verses at this point is another question. It may conceivably have been              
 unintentional - the words Wada Haelsingum were running in his mind                   
 (though in that case one might expect that he would have struck the line            
 out and not merely written another line against it as an alternative): but        
 at any rate the reason why they were running in his mind is clear, and this         
 possibility in no way diminishes the demonstrative value of the line that           
 Wingelot was derived from Guingelot, and that there was a connection                
 of greater significance than the mere taking over of a name- just as in the        
 case of Earendel.                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                         *                                           
                                                                                    
                       (iii) The Lay of the Fall of Condolin.                        
                                                                                    
 This was the title that late in his life my father wrote on the bundle of           
 papers constituting the abandoned beginning of this poem; but it seems             
 that  it  was  not  conceived  on  a  large  scale, since  the narrative  had reached
                                                                                    
  In which he undertook 'fabulous  exploits'. It  is conceivable  that there  was some
 connection between Earendel's great world-girdling voyage and the travels of  Wade as
 described  by  the  twelfth-century  English writer  Walter Map,  who tells  how Gado
 (sc. Wade) journeyed in his boat to the furthest Indies.                            

  the dragon-fire arising over the northern heights already within 130 lines.                    
  That he  composed it  while at  the University  of Leeds  is certain,  but I                    
  strongly suspect that it was the first versification of matter from the Lost                    
  Tales undertaken, before he turned to the alliterative  line. The  story, so                    
  far as it goes, has undergone virtually no development  from the  prose tale                    
  of The Fall of Condolin, and the closeness  of the  Lay to  the Tale  can be                    
  seen from this comparison (though the passage is exceptional):                                  
                                                                                                 
      (Tale, II. 158)                                                                           
      Rejoice that ye have found it, for behold before you the City of Seven                      
      Names where all who war with Melko may find hope.'                                          
        Then said Tuor: 'What be those names?' And the  chief of  the Guard                      
      made  answer:  "Tis  said  and 'tis  sung: "Gondobar  am I  called and                      
      Gondothlimbar, City of Stone and City  of the  Dwellers in  Stone, &c.                      
                                                                                                 
  (Lay) Rejoice that ye have found it and rest from endless war,                                  
            For the seven-named city 'tis that stands upon the hill,                              
            Where all who strive with Morgoth find hope and valour still.'                        
            'What be those names,' said Tuor, 'for I come from long afar?'                        
            "Tis said and 'tis sung,' one answered, '"My name is Gondobar                         
            And Gondothlimbar also, the City hewn of Stone,                                       
            The fortress of the Gnome-folk who dwell in Halls of Stone, &c.                      
                                                                                                 
      I do not give this poem in extenso here, since it does not, so far as the                   
  main narrative is concerned, add anything to the Tale; and my father                            
  found, as I think, the metrical form  unsuitable to  the purpose.  There are,                   
  : however, several passages of interest for the study of the larger develop-                    
  ment of the legends.                                                                            
      In  the Tale,  Tuor was  the son  of Peleg  (who was  the son  of Indor,                    
  II. 160), but here he is the son of Fengel; while on a scrap of paper giving                    
  rough workings of the  passage cited  above* Tuor  himself is  called Fengel                    
  - cf. 'Earendel son of Fengel' at  the end  of the  fragment of  an Earendel                    
  Lay,  p. 141.  Long afterwards  Fengel was  the name  of the  fifteenth King                    
  of Rohan  in the  Third Age,  grandfather of  Theoden, and  there it  is the                    
  , 'Old English noun fengel 'king, prince'.                                                      
      There are some  puzzling statements  made concerning  Fingolfin, whose                      
  appearance here, I feel certain, is earlier than those in the alliterative                      
  poems; and the passage in which he  appears introduces  also the  story of                      
  Isfin and Eol.                                                                                  
                                                                                                 
  (*  This  is  the  page referred  to in  Unfinished Tales  p. 4:  some lines  of verse  in which
  appear  the Seven  Names of  Gondolin are  scribbled on  the back  of a  piece of  paper setting
  out "the chain of responsibility in a battalion".' Not knowing at that time where  this isolated
  scrap came from I took this as an indication of very carly date, but this is certainly mistaken:
  the paper must have survived and been used years later for rough writing.)                       

               Lo, that prince of Gondobar [Meglin]                       
 dark Eol's son whom Isfin, in a mountain dale afar                       
 in the gloom of Doriath's forest, the white-limbed maiden bare,          
 the daughter of Fingolfin, Gelmir's mighty heir.                         
 'Twas the bent blades of the Glamhoth that drank Fingolfin's life        
 as he stood alone by Feanor; but his maiden and his wife                 
 were wildered as they sought him in the forests of the night,            
 in the pathless woods of Doriath, so dark that as a light               
 of palely mirrored moonsheen were their slender elfin limbs              
 straying among the black holes where only the dim bat skims              
 from Thu's dark-delved caverns. There Eol saw that sheen                 
 and he caught the white-limbed Isfin, that she ever since hath been      
 his mate in Doriath's forest, where she weepeth in the gloam;            
 for the Dark Elves were his kindred that wander without home.            
 Meglin she sent to Gondolin, and his honour there was high               
 as the latest seed of Fingolfin, whose glory shall not die;              
 a lordship he won of the Gnome-folk who quarry deep in the earth,        
 seeking their ancient jewels; but little was his mirth,                  
 and dark he was and secret and his hair as the strands of night          
 that are tangled in Taur Fuin* the forest without light.                  
                                                                         
 In the Lost Tales Finwe Noleme, first Lord of the Noldoli, was the '     
 father of Turgon (and so of Isfin, who was Turgon's sister), I. 115; '
 Finwe Noleme was slain in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears and his -'      
 heart cut out by Orcs, but Turgon rescued the body and heart of his      
 father, and the Scarlet Heart became his grim emblem (I. 241, II. 172).
 Finwe Noleme is also called Fingolma (I. 238 - 9, II. 220).              
 In the alliterative poems Fingolfin is the son of Finwe (Finweg) and     
 the father of Turgon, and also of Finweg (> Fingon), as he was to remain,
 (see p. 137). Thus:                                                      

             Lost Tales.          
                                 
  Finwe Noleme (Fingolma)         
  (slain in the Battle of         
  Unnumbered Tean).               
                                 
                                 
                                 
 Turgon.                     Isfin.

         Alliterative Poems.        
                                   
               Finwe.               
                                   
             Fingolfin.             
                                   
                                   
 Turgon.         Finweg (> Fingon):
               (slain in the Battle
               of Unnumbered Tears).

                            But whereas in the Lay of the Fall of Condolin Fingolfin has
                                                                                          
   (* Taur Fuin is the form in the Lost Tales; it was here emended later to Taur-na-Fuin,
 which is the form from the first in The Children of IIurin.)                             

 emerged and stepped into Finwe's place as the father of Turgon and            
 Isfin, he is not here the son of Finwe but of one Gelmir:                    
                                                                              
                                    Gelmir.                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                 Turgon Isfin.                                 
                                                                              
   In an early prose text - one  of the  very few  scraps (to  be given  in the
 next  volume)  that  bridge  the  gap  in  the prose  history between the Lost
 Tales  and  the 'Sketch  of the  Mythology' -  Gelmir appears  as the  King of
 the Noldoli at the time of the flight  from Valinor,  and one  of his  sons is
 there named Golfin.                                                           
   There is too  little evidence  extant (if  there ever  was any  more written
 down)  to  penetrate  with certainty  the earliest  evolution of  the Noldorin
 kings.  The  simplest  explanation  is  that  this  Gelmir, father  of Golfin/
 Fingolfin  =  Fingolma/Finwe  Noleme,  father  of  Fingolfin.  But it  is also
 said in this passage that Fingolfin  was slain  by the  Glamhoth 'as  he stood
 alone  by  Feanor',  and  whatever  story  lies  behind  this is  now vanished
 (for  the  earliest,  very  obscure,  references  to the  death of  Feanor see
                                                                              
 I. 238 - 9).                                                                  
   This  passage  from  the  Lay  of the  Fall of  Gondolin contains  the first
 account of the story of Eol the Dark Elf,  Isfin sister  of Turgon,  and their
 son Meglin (for  a very  primitive form  of the  legend see  II. 220).  In the
 prose  tale  of  The  Fall of  Gondolin the  story is  dismissed in  the words
 'that tale  of Isfin  and Eol  may not  here be  told', II.  165. In  the Lay,
 Fingolfin's  wife  and  daughter  (Isfin)  were  seeking  for him  when Isfin
 was  taken  by  Eol.  Since  in the  'Sketch' Isfin  was lost  in Taur-na-Fuin
 after  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears  and  there  trapped  by Eol,  it is
 possible that at this stage  Fingolfin was  the Elvish  king who  died (beside
 Feanor?) in the great battle. It is also possible that we see here the genesis
 of  the  idea  of  Isfin's  wandering in  the wilds,  although of  course with
 subsequent  shifts,  whereby  Fingolfin died  in duel  with Morgoth  after the
 Battle  of  Sudden  Flame  and  Fingon  (Isfin's  brother)  was  the  Noldorin
 king  slain  in  the  Battle  of  Unnumbered  Tears,  the  story that  she was
 seeking  her  father  was  abandoned.  What this  passage does  certainly show
 is that the story of Isfin's sending her son to Gondolin is original, but that
 originally  Isfin  remained  with  her  captor  Eol  and  never  escaped  from
 him.                                                                          
   Eol  here  dwells  'in  a  mountain  dale  afar  in  the gloom  of Doriath's
 forest', 'in the forests of the  night', 'where  only the  dim bat  skims from
 Thu's  dark-delved  caverns'.  This  must  be the  earliest reference  to Thu,
 and  at any  rate in  connected writing  the earliest  to Doriath  (Artanor of
 the Lost  Tales). I  have suggested  (II. 63)  that in  the Tale  of Tinuviel

  'Artanor was conceived as a great region of forest in the heart of which      
  was Tinwelint's cavern', and that the zone of the Queen's protection 'was     
  originally less distinctly bordered, and less extensive, than "the Girdle of
  Melian" afterwards became'. Here the description of Eol's habitation        
  in a forest without light (where Thu lives in caverns) suggests rather the
  forest of Taur-na-Fuin, where                                                 
                                                                               
                Never-dawning   night   was   netted   clinging                 
                in  the  black branches  of the  beetling trees                 
                                                                               
  and where                                                                     
                                                                               
                                               goblins even                     
                (whose deep eyes drill the darkest shadows)                     
                bewildered wandered                                             
                                (The Children of Hurin, p. 34 lines 753 ff.)
                                                                               
    The passage also contains  an interesting  reference to  the purpose  of the
  miners of Gondolin: 'seeking their ancient jewels.'                           
    Earlier  in this  Lay some  lines are  given to  the coming  of Tuor  to the
  hidden door beneath the Encircling Mountains:                                 
                                                                               
    Thither Tuor son of Fengel came out of the dim land                         
    that the Gnomes have called Dor-Lomin, with Bronweg at his hand,            
    who fled from the Iron Mountains and had broken Melko's chain               
    and cast his yoke of evil, of torment and bitter pain;                      
    who alone most faithful-hearted led Tuor by long ways                       
    through empty hills and valleys by dark nights and perilous days,           
    till his blue lamp magic-kindled, where flow the shadowy rills              
    beneath enchanted alders, found that Gate beneath the hills,                
    the door in dark Dungorthin that only-the Gnome-folk knew.                  
                                                                               
  In  a  draft  for  this  passage  the  name  here  is  Nan  Orwen,  emended to
  Dungorthin.   In  The   Children  of   Hurin  (lines   1457  ff.)   Turin  and
  Flinding came to this 'grey valley' after  they had  passed west  over Sirion,
  and  reached  the  roots  of  the  Shadowy  Mountains  'that  Hithlum girdle'.
  For earlier  references to  Nan Dungorthin  and different  placings of  it see
  p.  87;  the  present  passage  seems  to  indicate  yet  another,   with  the
  hidden door of Gondolin opening into it.                                      
                                                                               
    A few other passages may be noticed. At the beginning there is a           
  reference to old songs telling                                                
                                                                               
    how the Gods in council gathered on the outmost rocky bars                  
    of the Lonely Island westward, and devised a land of ease                   
    beyond the great sea-shadows and the shadowy seas;                          
    how they made the deep gulf of Faerie with long and lonely shore . . .
                                                                               
  That the Gods were ferried on  an island  by Osse  and the  Oarni at  the time
  of the fall  of the  Lamps is  told in  the tale  of The  Coming of  the Valar

                             
                                                                                          
 (I. 70), and that this isle was afterwards that of the  Elves' ferrying                   
 (becoming Tol Eressea) is told in The Coming of the Elves (I. 118).                      
  When Gondolin was built the people cried 'Cor is built anew! ' and the                   
 guard who told Tuor the seven names said:                                                 
                                                                                          
     Loth, the Flower, they name me, saying 'Cor is born again,                            
     even in Loth-a-ladwen,* the Lily of the Plain.'                                       
                                                                                          
 I  have  noticed  earlier  (II.  208)  that  whereas  it  is  explicit in  The Silmaril-
 lion   that   Turgon   devised   the   city   to   be   'a   memorial   of   Tirion  upon
 Tuna',  and  it  became  'as  beautiful   as  a   memory  of   Elven  Tirion',   this  is
 not   said   in   The   Fall  of   Condolin:  Turgon   was  born   in  the   Great  Lands
 after   the   return   of  the   Noldoli  from   Valinor,  and   had  never   known  Kor.
 'One   may  feel   nonetheless  that   the  tower   of  the   King,  the   fountains  and
 stairs,   the   white   marbles   of   Gondolin   embody   a   recollection  of   Kor  as
 it   is   described   in   The   Coming   of   the   Elves   and   the   Making   of  Kor
 (I. 122 - 3).                                                                             
  There is also a reference to Earendel                                                    
                                                                                          
                                         who passed the Gates of Dread,                    
                    half-mortal and half-elfin, undying and long dead.                     
                                                                                          
 The Gates of Dread are probably the gates of the Door of Night, through                   
 which Earendel passed (II. 255).                                                          
                                                                                          
 (* This is the only point in which the Seven Names differ  from their  forms in  the Tale
 (II. 158). In the Tale the name of the city as 'Lily of the Valley' is  Lothengriol. For
 ladwen 'plain' see II. 344. In a draft of the passage in the lay the name was Loth Barodrin.)
