                                               III.                                             
                                       THE LAY OF LEITHIAN.                                     
                                                                                               
 My father wrote in his diary that he began 'the poem of Tinuviel' during                       
 the period of the summer examinations of 1925 (see p. 3), and he                              
 abandoned it in September 193 I (see below), when he was 39. The rough                        
 workings for the whole poem are extant (and 'rough' means very rough                           
 indeed); from them he wrote a fair copy, which I shall call 'A'.*                              
  On this manuscript A my father most uncharacteristically inserted                             
 dates, the first of these being at line 557 (August 23, 1925); and he                          
 composed the last hundred-odd lines of the third Canto (ending at line                         
 757) while on holiday at Filey on the Yorkshire coast in September 1925.                      
 The next date is two and a half years and 400 lines later, 27 - 28 March                       
 1928 written against line 1161; and thereafter each day for a further nine                    
 days, till 6 April 1928, is marked, during which time he wrote out no less                    
 than 1768 lines, to 2929.                                                                     
  Since the dates refer to the copying of verses out fair in the manuscript,                    
 not to their actual composition, it might be thought that they prove little;                   
 but the rough workings of lines 2497 - 2504 are written on an abandoned                     
 letter dated x April 1928, and these lines were written in the fair copy A                   
 on 4 April - showing that lines 2505 - 2929 were actually composed                           
 between x and 6 April. I think therefore that the dates on A can be taken                      
 as effectively indicating the time of composition.                                             
  The date November 1929 (at line 3031) is followed by a substantial                           
 amount of composition in the last week of September 1930, and again in                         
 the middle of September 193 I; the last date is 17 September of that year                      
 against line 4085 very near the point where the Lay. was abandoned.                            
 Details of the dates are given in the Notes.                                                   
  There is also a typescript text ('B') made by my father, of which the                         
 last few hundred lines are in manuscript, and this text ends at precisely                      
 the same point as does A. This typescript was begun quite early, since my                      
 father mentioned in his diary for 16 August 1926 having done 'a little                        
 typing of part of Tinuviel', and before the end of 1929 he gave it to                          
 C. S. Lewis to read. On 7 December of that year Lewis wrote to him                             
 about it, saying:                                                                              
                                                                                               
  I sat up late last night and have read the Geste as far as to where Beren                    
  and his gnomish allies defeat the patrol of orcs above the sources of the                    
                                                                                               
  (* This was written on  the backs  of examination-scripts,  tied together  and prepared  as a
 blank manuscript: it was large enough to last through the six years, and a few scripts  at the
 end of the bundle remained unused.)                                                            

  Narog  and  disguise  themselves  in  the  reaf  [Old   English:  'garments,
  weapons, taken from the slain']. I can quite  honestly say  that it  is ages
  since  I have  had an  evening of  such delight:  and the  personal interest
  of reading a friend's work  had very  little to  do with  it. I  should have
  enjoyed it  just as  well as  if I'd  picked it  up in  a bookshop,  by an
  unknown  author.  The  two things  that come  out clearly  are the  sense of
  reality in the  background and  the mythical  value: the  essence of  a myth
  being  that  it  should  have  no  taint of  allegory to  the maker  and yet
  should suggest incipient allegories to the reader,                         
                                                                            
 Lewis had thus  reached in  his reading  about line  2017. He  had evidently
 received more; it may be that the typescript  by this  time extended  to the
 attack  on  Luthien  and  Beren  by  Celegorm   and  Curufin   fleeing  from
 Nargothrond, against which  (at line  303 t)  is the  date November  1929 in
 the manuscript. Some time after this,  probably early  in 1930,  Lewis sent
 my father 14 pages of detailed criticism, as far as line 1161 (if there was
 any more it  has not  survived). This  criticism he  contrived as  a heavily
 academic  commentary  on  the  text,  pretending  to  treat  the  Lay  as an
 ancient  and  anonymous   work  extant   in  many   more  or   less  corrupt
 manuscripts, overlaid by scribal  perversions in  antiquity and  the learned
 argumentation  of  nineteenth-century  scholars;  and   thus  entertainingly
 took  the  sting  from  some  sharply  expressed  judgements,  while  at the
 same  time in  this disguise  expressing strong  praise for  particular pas-
 sages. Almost all the verses which Lewis found wanting  for one  reason or
 another  are  marked  for  revision  in  the  typescript  B if  not actually
 rewritten,  and  in many  cases his  proposed emendations,  or modifications
 of  them,  are  incorporated  into  the  text. The  greater part  of Lewis's
 commentary is given on pp. 315 ff., with  the verses  he criticised  and the
 alterations made as a result.                                               
                                                                            
      My father abandoned the Lay at the point where the jaws of Carcharoth
    crashed together like a trap on Beren's hand and the Silmaril was
    engulfed, but though he never advanced beyond that place in the narra-
    tive, he did not abandon it for good. When ?he Lord of the Rings was
 finished he returned to the Lay again and recast the first two Cantos and a
       good part of the third, and small portions of some others.
       To summarise the elements of this history:
                                                                            
  (1). Rough workings of the whole poem, composed 1925 - 31.                  
  (2). Manuscript A of the whole poem, written out progressively              
       during 1925 - 31.                                                     
  (3). Typescript B of the whole poem (ending in manuscript), already         
       in progress in 1926.                                                  
          This typescript given to C. S. Lewis towards the end of 1929,     
       when it extended probably to about line 3031.                         

   (4). Recasting of the opening Cantos and parts of some others (after                      
   the completion of The Lord of the Rings).                                                 
                                                                                           
 The manuscript A was emended, both by changes and insertions, at                           
 different times, the majority of these alterations being incorporated in                   
 the typescript B; while in B, as typed, there are further changes not '                    
 found in A.                                                                                
 The amount of emendation made to B varies very greatly. My father                          
 used it as a basis for the later rewritings, and in these parts the old                    
 typescript is entirely covered with new verses; but for long stretches - by                
 far the greater part of the poem - the text is untouched save for very '.                  
 minor and as it were casual modifications to individual lines here and.                    
 there.                                                                                     
 After much experimentation I have concluded that to make a single,                         
 text, an amalgam derived from the latest writing throughout the poem,                      
 would be wholly mistaken. Quite apart from the practical difficulty of                     
 changed names in the rewritten parts that do not scan in the old lines, the                
 later verse in its range and technical accomplishment is too distinct; too                 
 much time had passed, and in the small amount that my father rewrote of                    
 the Lay of Leithian after The Lord of the Rings we have fragments of a '                   
 new poem: from which we can gain an idea of what might have been. I                        
 have therefore excised these parts, and give them subsequently and                         
 separately (Chapter IV).                                                                   
 A further reason for doing so lies in the purpose of this book, which                      
 includes the consideration of the Lays as important stages in the evolu-                   
 tion of the legends. Some of the revisions to the Lay of Leithian are at                   
 least 30 years later than the commencement of the poem. From the point                     
 of view of the 'history', therefore, the abandonment of the poem in or                     
 soon after September 1931 constitutes a terminal point, and I have                         
 excluded emendations to names that are (as I believe) certainly later than                 
 that, but included those which are earlier.* In a case like that of                        
 Beleriand, for instance, which was Broseliand for much of the poem in                       
 B and always later emended to Beleriand, but had become Beleriand as                       
 first written by line 3957, I give Beleriand throughout. On the other                      
 hand I retain Gnomes since my father still used this in The Hobbit. '                      
 The many small changes made for metrical/stylistic reasons, however,                       
 constitute a problem in the attempt to produce a 1931 text', since it                      
 is often impossible to be sure to which 'phase' they belong. Some are                      
                                                                                           
 (* This leads to inconsistent treatment of certain names as between the two long Lays, e.g.
 Finweg son of Fingo1fin in The Children of Hurin but Fingon in the Lay of Leithian.         
 Finweg survived into the 1930 version of 'The Silmarillion' but was early emended to      
 Fingon.)                                                                                   

  demonstrably very early - e.g. candle flowers emended to flowering        
  candles  (line  516),  since  C. S.  Lewis-commented on  the latter  - while
  others  are  demonstrably  from  many  years  later,  and  strictly  speaking
  belong with  the  late rewritings;  but many  cannot be  certainly determined.
  In any case, such changes - very often made to get  rid of  certain artifices
  employed  as  metrical aids,  most notably  among these  the use  of emphatic
  tenses with doth and did simply in order to obtain a syllable - such
  changes have no repercussions beyond the improvement of the individual
  line; and in such cases it seems a pity, through rigid adherence to the
  textual basis, to lose such small enhancements, or at any rate to hide them
 in a trail of tedious textual notes, while letting their less happy predeces-
 sors stand in the text. I have thought it justifiable therefore to be frankly
 inconsistent in these details, and while for example retaining Gnomes
 (for  Elves  or  other  substitution) or  Thu (for  Gorthu or  Sauron), to
 introduce  small  changes  of wording  that are  certainly later  than these.
 As  in  the Lay  of  the  Children  of  Hurin  there  are  no  numbered notes
 to the text;  the annotation,  related to  the line-numbers  of the  poem, is
 very largely restricted to earlier readings, and  these earlier  readings are
 restricted to cases where there is  some significant  difference, as  of name
 or motive. Citations from  the manuscript  A are  always citations  from that
 text as first written  (in very  many cases  it was  emended to  the reading
 found in B).                                                               
    It is to  be noticed  that while  the Lay  of Leithian  was in  process of
 composition the 'Sketch of  the Mythology'  was written  (first in  1926) and
 rewritten, leading directly  into the  version of  'The Silmarillion'  that I
 ascribe  to 1930,  in which  many of  the essentials,  both in  narrative and
 language,  of  the  published  work  were  already  present.  In  my  commen-
 taries  on  each Canto  I attempt  to take  stock of  the development  in the
 legends  pari passu  with the  text of  the poem,  and only  refer exception-
 ally to the contemporary prose works.                                        
    The  A-text  has  no  title, but  on the  covering page  of the  bundle of
 rough workings is written  Tinuviel, and  in his  early references  to the
 poem my father  called it  thus, as  he called  the alliterative  poem Turin.
 The B-text bears this title:                                                 
                                                                             
                                      The                                     
                                     GEST                                     
                                      of                                      
                             BEREN son of BARAHIR                             
                                      and                                     
                                LUTHIEN the FAY                               
                                    called                                    
                           TINUVIEL the NIGHTINGALE                           
                                    or the                                    
                                LAY OF LEITHIAN                               
                             Release from Bondage                             

                        
                                                                           
 The 'Gest of Beren and Luthien' means a narrative in verse, telling of the
 deeds of Beren and Luthien. The word gest is pronounced as Modern          
 English jest, being indeed the 'same word' in phonetic form, though now    
 totally changed in meaning.                                                
     My father never explained the name Leithian 'Release from Bondage',
 and we are left to choose, if we will, among various applications that can
 be seen in the poem. Nor did he leave any comment on the significance - if
 there is a significance - of the likeness of Leithian to Leithien 'England',
 In the tale of AElfwine of England the Elvish name of England is            
 Luthien (which was earlier the name of AElfwine himself, England           
 being Luthany), but at the first occurrence (only) of this name the word
 Leithian was pencilled above it (II. 330, note 20). In the 'Sketch         
 the Mythology' England was still Luthien (and at that time Thingol         
 daughter was also Luthien), but this was emended to Leithien, and this     
 is the form in the 1930 version of 'The Silmarillion'. I cannot say (i) what
 connection if any there was between the two significances of Luthien,      
 nor (ii) whether Leithien (once Leithian) 'England' is or was related to
 Leithian 'Release from Bondage'. The only evidence of an etymological      
 nature that I have found is a hasty note, impossible to date, which refers
 to a stem leth- 'set free', with leithia 'release', and compares Lay of    
 Leithian.                                                                  
                                                                           
                        The GEST of BEREN and LUTHIEN.                      
                                                                           
                                      I.                                    
                                                                           
               A king there was in days of old:                             
               ere Men yet walked upon the mould                            
               his power was reared in cavern's shade,                      
               his hand was over glen and glade.                            
               His shields were shining as the moon,                        
               his lances keen of steel were hewn,                          
               of silver grey his crown was wrought,                        
               the starlight in his banners caught;                         
               and silver thrilled his trumpets long                        
               beneath the stars in challenge strong;                       
               enchantment did his realm enfold,                            
               where might and glory, wealth untold,                        
               he wielded from his ivory throne                             
               in many-pillared halls of stone.                             

 There beryl, pearl, and opal pale,        15
 and metal wrought like fishes' mail,         
 buckler and corslet, axe and sword,          
 and gleaming spears were laid in hoard -     
 all these he had and loved them less         
 than a maiden once in Elfinesse;           20
 for fairer than are born to Men              
 a daughter had he, Luthien.                  
                                             
   Such lissom limbs no more shall run        
 on the green earth beneath the sun;          
 so fair a maid no more shall be            25
 from dawn to dusk, from sun to sea.          
 Her robe was blue as summer skies,           
 but grey as evening were her eyes;           
 'twas sewn with golden lilies fair,          
 but dark as shadow was her hair.           30
 Her feet were light as bird on wing,         
 her laughter lighter than the spring;        
 the slender willow, the bowing reed,         
 the fragrance of a flowering mead,           
 the light upon the leaves of trees,        35
 the voice of water, more than these          
 her beauty was and blissfulness,             
 her glory and her loveliness;                
 and her the king more dear did prize         
 than hand or heart or light of eyes.       40
                                             
 They dwelt amid Beleriand,                   
 while Elfin power yet held the land,         
 in the woven woods of Doriath:               
 few ever thither found the path;             
 few ever dared the forest-eaves            45
 to pass, or stir the listening leaves        
 with tongue of hounds a-hunting fleet,       
 with horse, or horn, or mortal feet.         
 To North there lay the Land of Dread,        
 whence only evil pathways led              50
 o'er hills of shadow bleak and cold          
 or Taur-na-Fuin's haunted hold,              
 where Deadly Nightshade lurked and lay       
 and never came or moon or day;               
 to South the wide earth unexplored;        55

          
                                              
 to West the ancient Ocean roared,             
 unsailed and shoreless, wide and wild;        
 to East in peaks of blue were piled           
 in silence folded, mist-enfurled,             
 the mountains of the Outer World,           60
 beyond the tangled woodland shade,            
 thorn and thicket, grove and glade,           
 whose brooding boughs with magic hung         
 were ancient when the world was young.        
                                              
 There Thingol in the Thousand Caves,        65
 whose portals pale that river laves           
 Esgalduin that fairies call,                  
 in many a tall and torchlit hall              
 a dark and hidden king did dwell,             
 lord of the forest and the fell;            70
 and sharp his sword and high his helm,        
 the king of beech and oak and elm.            
                                              
 There Luthien the lissom 'maid                
 would dance in dell and grassy glade,         
 and music merrily, thin and clear,          75
 went down the ways, more fair than ear        
 of mortal Men at feast hath heard,            
 and fairer than the song of bird.             
 When leaves were long and grass was green     
 then Dairon with his fingers lean,          80
 as daylight melted into shade,                
 a wandering music sweetly made,               
 enchanted fluting, warbling wild,             
 for love of Thingol's elfin child.            
                                              
 There bow was bent and shaft was sped,      85
 the fallow deer as phantoms fled,             
 and horses proud with braided mane,           
 with shining bit and silver rein,             
 went fleeting by on moonlit night,            
 as swallows arrow-swift in flight;          90
 a blowing and a sound of bells,               
 a hidden hunt in hollow dells.                
 There songs were made and things of gold,     
 and silver cups and jewels untold,            
 and the endless years of Faery land         95

              rolled over far Beleriand,                                                        
              until a day beneath the sun,                                                      
              when many marvels were begun.                                                     
                                                                                               
                                            NOTES.                                              
                                                                                               
    The opening of the poem in B is complicated by the fact that my father                      
    partly rewrote, and retyped, the first Canto - a rewriting entirely distinct                
    from the later fundamental recasting that the early part of the poem                        
    underwent. This first rewriting of the opening Canto was done while the                     
    original composition of the poem was still proceeding, but was fairly far                   
    advanced. The second version was typed in exactly the same form as that                     
    it replaced, whereas the last part of the B-text is not typed; but the name                 
    Beleriand appears in it, as typed, and not as an emendation, whereas                        
    elsewhere in B the form is Broseliand, always emended in ink to                             
    Beleriand.*  Moreover it was the first version of Canto I in the B-text that                
    C. S. Lewis read on the night of 6 December 1929, and I think it very                       
    probable that it was Lewis's criticism that led my father to rewrite the                    
    opening (see pp. 315 - 16). In the following notes the first version of B is                
    called B(1), the rewritten text given above being B(2).                                     
                                                                                               
     I - 30 A: A king was in the dawn of days:                                                  
               his golden crown did brightly blaze                                              
               with ruby red and crystal clear;                                                 
               his meats were sweet, his dishes dear;                                           
               red robes of silk, an ivory throne,                                          5
               and ancient halls of arched stone,                                               
               and wine and music lavished free,                                                
               and thirty champions and three,                                                  
               all these he had and heeded not.                                                 
               His daughter dear was Melilot:                                            10     
               from dawn to dusk, fron sun to sea,                                              
               no fairer maiden found could be.                                                 
               Her robe was blue as summer skies,                                               
               but not so blue as were her eyes;                                                
               'twas sewn with golden lilies fair,                                         15
               but none so golden as her hair.                                                  
                                                                                               
           An earlier draft, after line 12 found could be, has the couplet:                     
                                                                                               
               from England unto Eglamar                                                        
               o'er folk and field and lands afar.                                              
                                                                                               
     (* Once near the very end (line 3957), in the manuscript conclusion of the B-text, the form
     as written is Beleriand, not Broseliand.)                                                   

                 B(1): A king there was in olden days:                 
                           &c. as A to line 6                          
                                                                      
                    and hoarded gold in gleaming grot,                 
                    all these he had and heeded not.                   
                    But fairer than are born to Men                    
                    a daughter had he, Luthien:                        
                        &c. as B(2)                                    
                                                                      
  14-18. These lines  were used  afterwards in  Gimli's song  in Moria
         (The Fellowship of  the Ring  II. 4);  see the  Commentary by
                                                                      
         C. S. Lewis, p. 3I6.                                          
                                                                      
  41-4.          A: They dwelt in dark Broceliand                   
                    while loneliness yet held the land.                
                                                                      
                B(1): They dwelt beyond Broseliand                 
                    while loneliness yet held the land,                
                    in the forest dark of Doriath.                     
                    Few ever thither found the path;                   
                                                                      
         In B(1) Ossiriande is pencilled above Broseliand. As noted
         above, B (2) has Beleriand as typed.                           
                                                                      
     48. After this line A and B(1) have:                              
                                                                      
                    Yet came at whiles afar and dim                    
                    beneath the roots of mountains grim                
                    a blowing and a sound of bells,                    
                    a hidden hunt in hollow dells.                     
                                                                      
         The second couplet reappears at a later point in B(2), lines
         9 I - 2.                                                      
                                                                      
  49-61  A and B(1):                                                   
                                                                      
                    To North there lay the Land of Dread,              
                    whence only evil pathways led                      
                    o'er hills of shadow bleak and cold;               
                    to West and South the oceans rolled                
                    unsailed and shoreless, wild and wide;             
                    to East and East the hills did hide                
                    beneath the tangled woodland shade,                
                                                                      
   65-6. A: There Celegorm his ageless days                            
         doth wear amid the woven ways,                                
         the glimmering aisles and endless naves                       
         whose pillared feet that river laves                          
                                                                      
     67. Esgalduin A,  but Esgaduin  in the  rough workings,  which is
         the form in The Children of  Hurin (p.  76, line  2164) before
         correction.                                                   

                                                                    
 73. A: There Melilot the lissom maid                                                       
 79-84. Not in A.                                                                         
 85-93. A and B(1) (with one slight difference):                                          
                                                                                          
                     There bow was bent and shaft was sped                                 
                     and deer as fallow phantoms fled,                                     
                     and horses pale with harness bright                                   
                     went jingling by on moonlit night;                                    
                     there songs were made and things of gold                              
                                                                                          
        See note to line 48.                                                               
                                                                                          
   96. A: rolled over dark Broceliand,                                                      
        B(1): rolled over far Broseliand,                                                  
        In B(1) Ossiriande is pencilled against Broseliand, as at line                     
        41.                                                                                
                                                                                          
                                   Commentary on Canto I.                                  
                                                                                          
 An extraordinary feature of  the A-version  is the  name Celegorm  given to               
 the  King  of  the  woodland Elves  (Thingol); moreover  in the  next Canto               
 the  role  of  Beren  is  in A  played by  Maglor, son  of Egnor.  The only               
 possible conclusion, strange as it is, is  that my  father was  prepared to               
 abandon  Thingol  for  Celegorm  and  (even  more  astonishing)  Beren  for               
 Maglor.  Both  Celegorm  and  Maglor  as  sons of  Feanor have  appeared in               
 the Tale of the Nauglafring and in the Lay of the Children of Hurin.                      
  The name of the king's daughter in A,  Melilot, is  also puzzling  (and is               
 it  the  English plant-name,  as in  Melilot Brandybuck,  a guest  at Bilbo               
 Baggins' farewell party?). Already in  the second  version of  The Children               
 of Hurin Luthien has appeared as the 'true' name of Tinuviel (see p.  x ig,               
 note to 358 - 66). It is perhaps possible that my father in fact  began the               
 Lay  of  Leithian  before  he  stopped work  on The  Children of  Hurin, in               
 which case Melilot might be the  first 'true'  name of  Tinuviel, displaced               
 by Luthien; but I think that this is extremely unlikely.* In view of Beren               
 >  Maglor,  I  think Luthien  > Melilot  far more  probable. In  any event,               
 Beren  and  Luthien  soon  appear  in  the  original drafts  of the  Lay of               
 Leithian.                                                                                 
  It  is  strange  also  that  in A  the king's  daughter was  blue-eyed and               
 golden-haired, for this would  not accord  with the  robe of  darkness that               
                                                                                          
 (* My father expressly stated in his diary that he began Tinuviel iel in the summer of 1925;
 and it is to be noted that a reference to the Lay of Leithian appears in  the alliterative
 head-piece to one of the typcscripts of Light as Leaf on Lindentree  - which  was actually
 published in June 1925 (see pp. 120-1). Thus the reference in the  second version  of The
 Children of Hurin to the Lay of Leithian (p. 107 line 356) is not evidence that he  had in
 fact begun it.)                                                                           

                                                                        
                                                                                               
 she spun from her  hair: in  the Tale  of Tinuviel  her hair  was 'dark'                       
 (II. 20).                                                                                      
  The  name  Broceliand  that  appears  in  A  (Broseliand  B)  is  remark-                       
 able, but I can cast no light on my  father's choice  of this  name (the                       
 famous Forest of Broceliande in Brittany of the Arthurian  legends).> It                       
 would  be  interesting to  know how  Broseliand led  to Beleriand,  and a                       
 clue may perhaps be found on a page of rough working for the  opening of                       
 the Lay, where he jotted down various names  that must  be possibilities                       
 that he was pondering for the name of the land. The fact  that Ossiriand                       
 occurs among them, while it is also pencilled against Broseliand at lines                       
 41 and 96 in B(1), may suggest that these names arose during  the search                       
 for a replacement of Broseliand. The names are:                                                 
                                                                                               
    Colodhinand, Noldorinan, Geleriand, Bladorinand, Belaurien,                                 
    Arsiriand, Lassiriand, Ossiriand.                                                           
                                                                                               
 Colodhinand  is incidentally  interesting as  showing Colodh,  the later                       
 Sindarin  equivalent  of  Quenya  Noldo (in  the old  Gnomish dictionary                       
 Golda was the Gnomish equivalent of 'Elvish'  Noldo, I.  262). Geleriand                       
 I  can  cast  no  light on;  but Belaurien  is obviously  connected with                       
 Belaurin,  the  Gnomish  form  of  Pahirien  (I.  264),  and Bladorinand                       
 with Palurien's name Bladorwen 'the wide earth, Mother Earth' (ibid.).                       
 It seems at least possible that Belaurien  lies behind  Beleriand (which                       
 was afterwards explained quite differently).                                                   
  Another  curious  feature  is  the  word beyond  in They  dwelt beyond                       
 Broseliand, the reading of B(1) at line 41, where A has in and  B(2) has                       
 amid.                                                                                          
  Esga(l)duin,  Taur-na-Fuin  (for  Taur  Fuin  of  the Lost  Tales), and                       
 the  Thousand  Caves have  all appeared  in The  Children of  Hurin; but                       
 in the mountains that                                                                          
                                                                                               
                    to East in peaks of blue were piled                                         
                    in silence folded, mist-enfurled                                            
                                                                                               
 - lines that are absent from A and B(1) - we have the first appearance of                      
 the Blue Mountains (Ered Luin) of the  later legends:  fencing Beleriand,                      
 as it seems, from the Outer World.                                                            
                                                                                               
  In all the texts of  the first  Canto the  King of  the woodland  Elves is                    
 presented as possessing great  wealth. This  conception appears  already in                    
 The Children  of Hurin  (see p.  26), in  the most  marked contrast  to all                    
 that is told in the Lost Tales: cf. the Tale of Turambar (II. 95) 'the folk                    
 of  Tinwelint  were of  the woodlands  and had  scant wealth',  'his riches                    
 were small', and  the Tale  of the  Nauglafring (II.  227) 'A  golden crown                    
                                                                                               
 (* On the earliest 'Silmarillion' map it is said that 'all the lands watered by Sirion south of
  Gondolin are called in English "Broseliand" '.)                                             

 they [the Dwarves] made for Tinwelint, who yet had worn nought but a
 wreath of scarlet leaves.'                                            
                                                                      
                                 II.                                   
                                                                      
            Far in the North neath hills of stone                      
            in caverns black there was a throne                    100
            by fires illumined underground,                            
            that winds of ice with moaning sound                       
            made flare and flicker in dark smoke;                       
            the wavering bitter coils did choke                        
            the sunless airs of dungeons deep                      105
            where evil things did crouch and creep.                    
            There sat a king: no Elfin race                            
            nor mortal blood, nor kindly grace                         
            of earth or heaven might he own,                           
            far older, stronger than the stone                     110
            the world is built of, than the fire                       
            that burns within more fierce and dire;                    
            and thoughts profound were in his heart:                   
            a gloomy power that dwelt apart.                           
                                                                      
                Unconquerable spears of steel                      115
            were at his nod. No ruth did feel                          
            the legions of his marshalled hate,                        
            on whom did wolf and raven wait;                           
            and black the ravens sat and cried                         
            upon their banners black, and wide                     120
            was heard their hideous chanting dread                     
            above the reek and trampled dead.                          
            With fire and sword his ruin red                           
            on all that would not bow the head                         
            like lightning fell. The Northern land                 125
            lay groaning neath his ghastly hand.                       
                                                                      
                But still there lived in hiding cold                   
            undaunted, Barahir the bold,                               
            of land bereaved, of lordship shorn,                       
            who once a prince of Men was born                      130
            and now an outlaw lurked and lay                           
            in the hard heath and woodland grey,                       

 and with him clung of faithful men                  
 but Beren his son and other ten.                    
 Yet small as was their hunted band             135
 still fell and fearless was each hand,              
 and strong deeds they wrought yet oft,              
 and loved the woods, whose ways more soft           
 them seemed than thralls of that black throne       
 to live and languish in halls of stone.        140
 King Morgoth still pursued them sore                
 with men and dogs, and wolf and boar                
 with spells of madness filled he sent               
 to slay them as in the woods they went;             
 yet nought hurt them for many years,           '45
 until, in brief to tell what tears                  
 have oft bewailed in ages gone,                     
 nor ever tears enough, was done                     
 a deed unhappy; unaware                             
 their feet were caught in Morgoth's snare.     150
                                                    
 Gorlim it was, who wearying                         
 of toil and flight and harrying,                    
 one night by chance did turn his feet               
 o'er the dark fields by stealth to meet             
 with hidden friend within a dale,              155
 and found a homestead looming pale                  
 against the misty stars, all dark                   
 save one small window, whence a spark               
 of fitful candle strayed without.                   
 Therein he peeped, and filled with doubt       160 
 he saw, as in a dreaming deep                       
 when longing cheats the heart in sleep,             
 his wife beside a dying fire                        
 lament him lost; her thin attire                    
 and greying hair and paling cheek               165
 of tears and loneliness did speak.                  
 'A! fair and gentle Eilinel,                        
 whom I had thought in darkling hell                 
 long since emprisoned! Ere I fled                   
 I deemed I saw thee slain and dead              170
 upon that night of sudden fear                      
 when all I lost that I held dear':                  
 thus thought his heavy heart amazed                 

 outside in darkness as he gazed.                
 But ere he dared to call her name,           175
 or ask how she escaped and came                 
 to this far vale beneath the hills,             
 he heard a cry beneath the hills!               
 There hooted near a hunting owl                 
 with boding voice. He heard the howl         180
 of the wild wolves that followed him            
 and dogged his feet through shadows dim.        
 Him unrelenting, well he knew,                  
 the hunt of Morgoth did pursue.                 
 Lest Eilinel with him they slay              185
 without a word he turned away,                  
 and like a wild thing winding led               
 his devious ways o'er stony bed                 
 of stream, and over quaking fen,                
 until far from the homes of men              190
 he lay beside his fellows few                   
 in a secret place; and darkness grew,           
 and waned, and still he watched unsleeping,     
 and saw the dismal dawn come creeping           
 in dank heavens above gloomy trees.          195
 A sickness held his soul for ease,              
 and hope, and even thraldom's chain             
 if he might find his wife again.                
 But all he thought twixt love of lord           
 and hatred of the king abhorred              200
 and anguish for fair Eilinel                    
 who drooped alone, what tale shall tell?        
                                                
   Yet at the last, when many days               
 of brooding did his mind amaze,                 
 he found the servants of the king,           205
 and bade them to their master bring             
 a rebel who forgiveness sought,                 
 if haply forgiveness might be bought            
 with tidings of Barahir the bold,               
 and where his hidings and his hold           210
 might best be found by night or day.            
 And thus sad Gorlim, led away                   
 unto those dark deep-dolven halls,              
 before the knees of Morgoth falls,              

 and puts his trust in that cruel heart     215
 wherein no truth had ever part.                 
 Quoth Morgoth: 'Eilinel the fair                
 thou shalt most surely find, and there          
 where she doth dwell and wait for thee          
 together shall ye ever be,                 220
 and sundered shall ye sigh no more.             
 This guerdon shall he have that bore            
 these tidings sweet, 0 traitor dear!            
 For Eilinel she dwells not here,                
 but in the shades of death doth roam       225
 widowed of husband and of home -                
 a wraith of that which might have been,         
 methinks, it is that thou hast seen!            
 Now shalt thou through the gates of pain        
 the land thou askest grimly gain;          230
 thou shalt to the moonless mists of hell        
 descend and seek thy Eilinel.'                  
                                                
 Thus Gorlim died a bitter death                 
 and cursed himself with dying breath,           
 and Barahir was caught and slain,          235 
 and all good deeds were made in vain.           
 But Morgoth's guile for ever failed,            
 nor wholly o'er his foes prevailed,             
 and some were ever that still fought            
 unmaking that which malice wrought.        240
 Thus men believed that Morgoth made             
 the fiendish phantom that betrayed              
 the soul of Gorlim, and so brought              
 the lingering hope forlorn to nought            
 that lived amid the lonely wood;           245
 yet Beren had by fortune good                   
 long hunted far afield that day,                
 and benighted in strange places lay             
 far from his fellows. In his sleep              
 he felt a dreadful darkness creep          250
 upon his heart, and thought the trees           
 were bare and bent in mournful breeze;          
 no leaves they had, but ravens dark             
 sat thick as leaves on bough and bark,          
 and croaked, and as they croaked each neb  255

         
                                                 
 let fall a gout of blood; a web                  
 unseen entwined him hand and limb,               
 until worn out, upon the rim                     
 of stagnant pool he lay and shivered.            
 There saw he that a shadow quivered         260
 far out upon the water wan,                      
 and grew to a faint form thereon                 
 that glided o'er the silent lake,                
 and coming slowly, softly spake                  
 and sadly said: 'Lo! Gorlim here,            265
 traitor betrayed, now stands! Nor fear,          
 but haste! For Morgoth's fingers close           
 upon thy father's throat. He knows               
 your secret tryst, your hidden lair',            
 and all the evil he laid bare                270
 that he had done and Morgoth wrought.            
 Then Beren waking swiftly sought                 
 his sword and bow, and sped like wind            
 that cuts with knives the branches thinned       
 of autumn trees. At last he came,            275
 his heart afire with burning flame,              
 where Barahir his father lay;                    
 he came too late. At dawn of day                 
 he found the homes of hunted men,                
 a wooded island in the fen,                  280
 and birds rose up in sudden cloud -              
 no fen-fowl were they crying loud.               
 The raven and the carrion-crow                   
 sat in the alders all a-row;                     
 one croaked: 'Ha! Beren comes too late',     285
 and answered all: 'Too late! Too late! '         
 There Beren buried his father's bones,           
 and piled a heap of boulder-stones,              
 and cursed the name of Morgoth thrice,           
 but wept not, for his heart was ice.         290
                                                 
 Then over fen and field and mountain             
 he followed, till beside a fountain              
 upgushing hot from fires below                   
 he found the slayers and his foe,                
 the murderous soldiers of the king.          295
 And one there laughed, and showed a ring         

 he took from Barahir's dead hand.                    
 'This ring in far Beleriand,                         
 now mark ye, mates,' he said, 'was wrought.          
 Its like with gold could not be bought,         300 -
 for this same Barahir I slew,                        
 this robber fool, they say, did do                   
 a deed of service long ago                           
 for Felagund. It may be so;                          
 for Morgoth bade me bring it back,              305
 and yet, methinks, he has no lack                    
 of weightier treasure in his hoard.                  
 Such greed befits not such a lord,                   
 and I am minded to declare                           
 the hand of Barahir was bare! '                 310
 Yet as he spake an arrow sped;                       
 with riven heart he crumpled dead.                   
 Thus Morgoth loved that his own foe                  
 should in his service deal the blow                  
 that punished the breaking of his word.         315
 But Morgoth laughed not when he heard                
 that Beren like a wolf alone                         
 sprang madly from behind a stone                     
 amid that camp beside the well,                      
 and seized the ring, and ere the yell           320
 of wrath and rage had left their throat              
 had fled his foes. His gleaming coat                  
 was made of rings of steel no shaft                  
 could pierce, a web of dwarvish craft;               
 and he was lost in rock and thorn,              325
 for in charmed hour was Beren born;                  
 their hungry hunting never learned                   
 the way his fearless feet had turned.                
                                                     
   As fearless Beren was renowned,                    
 as man most hardy upon ground,                  330
 while Barahir yet lived and fought;                  
 but sorrow now his soul had wrought                  
 to dark despair, and robbed his life                 
 of sweetness, that he longed for knife,              
 or shaft, or sword, to end his pain,            335
 and dreaded only thraldom's chain.                   
 Danger he sought and death pursued,                  

                                           
                                            
 and thus escaped the fate he wooed,         
 and deeds of breathless wonder dared        
 whose whispered glory widely fared,      340
 and softly songs were sung at eve           
 of marvels he did once achieve              
 alone, beleaguered, lost at night           
 by mist or moon, or neath the light         
 of the broad eye of day. The woods       345
 that northward looked with bitter feuds     
 he filled and death for Morgoth's folk;     
 his comrades were the beech and oak,        
 who failed him not, and many things         
 with fur and fell and feathered wings;   350
 and many spirits, that in stone             
 in mountains old and wastes alone,          
 do dwell and wander, were his friends.      
 Yet seldom well an outlaw ends,             
 and Morgoth was a king more strong       355
 than all the world has since in song        
 recorded, and his wisdom wide               
 slow and surely who him defied              
 did hem and hedge. Thus at the last         
 must Beren flee the forest fast          360
 and lands he loved where lay his sire       
 by reeds bewailed beneath the mire.         
 Beneath a heap of mossy stones              
 now crumble those once mighty bones,        
 but Beren flees the friendless North     365
 one autumn night, and creeps him forth;     
 the leaguer of his watchful foes            
 he passes - silently he goes.               
 No more his hidden bowstring sings,         
 no more his shaven arrow wings,          370
 no more his hunted head doth lie            
 upon the heath beneath the sky.             
 The moon that looked amid the mist          
 upon the pines, the wind that hissed        
 among the heather and the fern           375
 found him no more. The stars that burn      
 about the North with silver fire            
 in frosty airs, the Burning Briar           
 that Men did name in days long gone,        

            were set behind his back, and shone           380
            o'er  land  and  lake  and  darkened hill,       
            forsaken fen and mountain rill.                  
                                                            
            His face was South from the Land of Dread,       
            whence only evil pathways led,                   
            and only the feet of men most bold            385
            might cross the Shadowy Mountains cold.          
            Their northern slopes were filled with woe,      
            with evil and with mortal foe;                   
            their southern faces mounted sheer               
            in rocky pinnacle and pier,                   390
            whose roots were woven with deceit               
            and washed with waters bitter-sweet.             
            There magic lurked in gulf and glen,             
            for far away beyond the ken                      
            of searching eyes, unless it were             395
            from dizzy tower that pricked the air            
            where only eagles lived and cried,               
            might grey and gleaming be descried              
            Beleriand, Beleriand,                            
            the borders of the faery land.                400
                                                            
                               NOTES.                        
                                                            
    128.    A: a lord of Men undaunted, bold                 
    134.    A: Maglor his son and other ten.                 
    141.    A: But the king Bauglir did hunt them sore       
 177-9.     Earlier reading:                                 
            to this far vale among the hills                 
            a haggard hungry people tills,                   
            there hooted nigh a hunting owl                  
   205.     found: earlier reading sought                    
 209 - 10.  A: with tidings of Lord Egnor's band,            
            and where their hidings in the land              
    235.    A: and Egnor was betrayed and slain              
    246.    A: yet Maglor it was by fortune good             
            who hunting &c.                                  
    272.    A: till Maglor waking swiftly sought             
    277.    A: to where his father Egnor lay;                
    297.    A: he took from Egnor's slaughtered hand:        

    298.    Broceliand A, Broseliand B emended to Beleriand                       
    301.    A: for this same Egnor that I slew                                   
    304.    Celegorm A, emended to Felagoth and then to Felagund                 
    310.    A: I found the hand of Egnor bare! '                                 
 313 - 16.  These four lines were bracketed, and that at line 3 I 7 changed      
            to Then, before the B-text went to C. S. Lewis (my father's          
            numbering of the lines excludes these four, and Lewis's              
            line-references agree). Lewis did not concur with the ex-             
            clusion of 3 I 3 - 14, and I have let all four lines stand. See      
            pp. 318-19.                                                          
 317,329.   Maglor A, Beren B                                                    
   326.     A: and deep ghylls in the mountains torn.                             
 331-3.     A: ere Egnor in the wilderness                                       
            was slain; but now his loneliness,                                   
            grief and despair, did rob his life                                  
    360.    A: proud Maglor fled the forest fast                                 
            (fast is used in the sense 'secure against attack'; cf. fastness).
    365.    Maglor A, Beren B                                                   
 377-81.    A: about the North with silver flame                                 
            in frosty airs, that men did name                                    
            Timbridhil in the days long gone,                                    
            he set behind his back, and shone                                    
            that sickle of the heavenly field                                    
            that Bridhil Queen of stars did wield                                
            o'er land and lake and darkened hill,                                
            The fifth and sixth lines are bracketed, with and shone in           
            the fourth changed to It shone.                                      
 383-4.     Cf. lines 49 - 50.                                                   
   399.     Broceliand A, Broseliand B emended to Beleriand.                      
                                                                                
                              Commentary on Canto II.                            
                                                                                
 In  this  second  Canto  the  story  of  the  betrayal  of  the  outlaw  band  is
 already in A close to its final form in essentials; but there is no trace  of the
 story  in  any  form  earlier  than  the  first  drafts of  the Lay  of Leithian,
 composed  in  the  summer  of   1925  (see   p.  150).   In  commenting   on  the
 Tale of Tinuviel I noted (II. 52):                                              
                                                                                
  It  seems  clear  that  at  this  time  the  history  of  Beren  and  his father
  (Egnor)  was  only  very  sketchily devised;  there is  in any  case no  hint of
  the  story  of  the  outlaw  band  led  by  his  father  and  its   betrayal  by
  Gorlim  the   Unhappy  before   the  first   form  of   the  Lay   of  Leithian.
                                                                                
  There  are  indeed  differences  in  the  plot of  the Lay  from the  story told
 in  The  Silmarillion  (pp.  162ff.):  thus  the  house  where  Gorlim   saw  the
 phantom  of  Eilinel  was  not  in  the  Lay  his  own;  his  treachery  was  far
 deeper  and  more  deliberate,  in  that he  sought out  the servants  of Morgoth

  with  the  intention  of  revealing the  hiding-place of  the outlaws;  and he
  came  before  Morgoth   himself  (not   Thu-Sauron).  But   these  differences
  are  much  outnumbered by  the similarities,  such as  the absence  of Maglor-
  Beren  on  the fatal  day, the  apparition of  Gorlim coming  to him  in dream
  across the water of the lake, the carrion-birds in the alder-trees, the cairn,
  the seizing of the ring, his friendship with birds and beasts.                
    As  regards  the  names  in  the   A-text:  Gorlim   and  Eilinel   were  to
  remain.  Maglor-Beren  has  already  been  discussed   (p.  159).   Egnor  was
  still his  father, as  in the  last Tales  (the emendation  to Barahir  in the
  second  version  of  the  Tale  of  Tinuviel,  II.  43,  was  a   change  made
  casually  years  later).  Bauglir  (which  entered  during the  composition of
  The  Children  of  Hurin,  see  p.  52)  is  changed  throughout  to  Morgoth,
  but this seems not to  have been  a rejection  of the  name, since  it appears
  later in the B-text of the Lay, and survives in The Silmarillion.             
    In A Varda is called Bridhil (note to lines  377 -  81), as  she is  also in
  alliterative  poem  The  Plight  of  the  Noldoli  (pp. 135,  139); but  it is
  puzzling  that the  constellation of  the Great  Bear is  in the  same passage
  called Timbridhil, for that  according to  the old  Gnomish dictionary  is the
  title  of Varda  herself (as  one would  expect: cf.  Tinwetari, I.  269). The
  'Sickle of the Gods' (Valacirca) is here  the 'sickle  of the  heavenly field'
  wielded by Bridhil Queen of Stars.  I can  cast no  light at  all on  the name
  Burning  Briar  that  appears  in  B  (line  378);  it  reappears in  the 1930
  version of 'The Silmarillion':                                                
                                                                               
    Many  names  have  these  [the  Seven  Stars]  been called,  but in  the old
    days  of  the  North  both  Elves  and  Men called  them the  Burning Briar,
    and some the Sickle of the Gods.                                            
                                                                               
  For the earliest myth of the Great Bear see I. I 14, 133.                     
                                                                               
    Indications  of  geography  are  sparse,  and not  increased in  the B-text.
  Taur-na-Fuin  has  been  named  earlier  in  B  (line  52),  but  it   is  not
  actually  said  in  the  present  Canto  to  be the  region where  the outlaws
  lurked,  though  there is  no reason  to doubt  that this  is where  my father
  placed   it.   Coming   southwards    Maglor-Beren   crossed    'the   Shadowy
  Mountains   cold'   (386).   The   Shadowy   Mountains   were   named  several
  times  in  The  Children  of  Hurin,  where  they  are  the  mountains fencing
  Hithlum, mirrored in  the pools  of Ivrin,  as they  are in  The Silmarillion.
  But  it  would  obviously  be  impossible  for  Beren  to  cross  the  Shadowy
  Mountains  in  this  application  of  the  name  if  he  were  coming  out  of
  Taur-na-Fuin  and  moving  south  towards  Doriath.  In  the  'Sketch  of  the
  Mythology'   Beren  likewise   'crosses  the   Shadowy  Mountains   and  after
  grievous  hardships  comes  to Doriath',  and similarly  in the  1930 version;
  in  this  latter,  however,  'Mountains  of  Shadow'  was  emended  to 'Mount-
  ains  of Terror'.  It is  then clear  that in  the Lay  of Leithian  my father
  was  using  'Shadowy  Mountains'  in  a  different  sense  from  that   in The
  Children  of  Hurin,   and  that   the  Shadowy   Mountains  of   the  present

  Canto  are  the first  mention of  Ered Gorgoroth,  the Mountains  of Terror,
  'the   precipices   in  which   Dorthonion  [Taur-nu-Fuin]   fell  southward'
  (The Silmarillion p. 95); but the other meaning reappears (p. 234.).         
    The  lake  where  Egnor-Barahir  and  his  band  dwelt  in  hiding,  in The
  Silmarillion  (p.  162)  Tarn  Aeluin,  is not  named in  the Lay,  where the
  hiding-place  was  'a  wooded  island in  the fen'  (280). That  the Orc-camp
  was beside a  spring (also  unnamed) appears  in the  Lay, and  it is  here a
  hot spring (292 - 3); in The Silmarillion (p. 163) it was Rieil's Well above
  the Fen of Serech.                                                           
                                                                              
    Most notable of the features of  this Canto  so far  as the  development of
  the legends is'concerned, the  rescue of  Felagund by  Barahir in  the Battle
  of  Sudden  Flame (The  Silmarillion p.  152) makes  its first  appearance in
  the 'service' done to Celegorm by  Egnor in  A (lines  301 -  4, where  B has
  Felagund and  Barahir). 'Celegorm'  has already  ceased its  brief life  as a
  replacement of Thingol (see p. 159), and  is now  again that  of one  of the
  sons  of  Feanor,  as  it  was  in The  Children of  Hurin. When  these lines
  in  A  were  written  the  story  was  that  Celegorm  (and  Curufin) founded
  Nargothrond  after the  breaking of  the Leaguer  of Angband  - a  story that
  seems  to  have  arisen  in  the  writing  of  The  Children  of  Hurin,  see
  pp. 83 - 5;, and it was  Celegorm who  was rescued  by Egnor-Barahir  in that
  battle, and who  gave Egnor-Barahir  his ring.  In the  B-text the  story has
  moved  forward  again,  with  the  emergence  of  (Felagoth  >)  Felagund  as
  the  one  saved  by  Barahir  and  the  founder  of   Nargothrond,  thrusting
  Celegorm and Curufin into a very different role.                             
    In A Egnor  and his  son Maglor  (Beren) are  Men (e.g.  Egnor was  'a lord
  of Men', note to line 128). In  the first  version of  The Children  of Hurin
  Beren  was  still an  Elf, while  in the  second version  my father  seems to
  have changed back and forth on  this matter  (see pp.  124 -  5). He  had not
  even now, as will appear later, finally settled the question.                
                                                                              
                                     III.                                      
                                                                              
                There once, and long and long ago,                             
                before the sun and moon we know                                
                were lit to sail above the world,                              
                when first the shaggy woods unfurled,                          
                and shadowy shapes did stare and roam                     405
                beneath the dark and starry dome                               
                that hung above the dawn of Earth,                             
                the silences with silver mirth                                 
                were shaken; the rocks were ringing,                           

 the birds of Melian were singing,        410
 the first to sing in mortal lands,             
 the nightingales with her own hands            
 she fed, that fay of garments grey;            
 and dark and long her tresses lay              
 beneath her silver girdle's seat         415
 and down unto her silver feet.                 
                                               
 She had wayward wandered on a time             
 from gardens of the Gods, to climb             
 the everlasting mountains free                 
 that look upon the outmost sea,          420
 and never wandered back, but stayed            
 and softly sang from glade to glade.           
 Her voice it was that Thingol heard,           
 and sudden singing of a bird,                  
 in that old time when new-come Elves     425
 had all the wide world to themselves.          
 Yet all his kin now marched away,              
 as old tales tell, to seek the bay             
 on the last shore of mortal lands,             
 where mighty ships with magic hands      430
 they made, and sailed beyond the seas.         
 The Gods them bade to lands of ease            
 and gardens fair, where earth and sky          
 together flow, and none shall die.             
 But Thingol stayed, enchanted, still,    435
 one moment to hearken to the thrill            
 of that sweet singing in the trees.            
 Enchanted moments such as these                
 from gardens of the Lord of Sleep,             
 where fountains play and shadows creep,  440
 do come, and count as many years               
 in mortal lands. With many tears               
 his people seek him ere they sail,             
 while Thingol listens in the dale.             
 There after but an hour, him seems,      445
 he finds her where she lies and dreams,        
 pale Melian with her dark hair                 
 upon a bed of leaves. Beware!                  
 There slumber and a sleep is twined!           
 He touched her tresses and his mind      450

 was drowned in the forgetful deep,             
 and dark the years rolled o'er his sleep.      
                                               
 Thus Thingol sailed not on the seas            
 but dwelt amid the land of trees,              
 and Melian he loved, divine,                455
 whose voice was potent as the wine             
 the Valar drink in golden halls                
 where flower blooms and fountain falls;        
 but when she sang it was a spell,              
 and no flower stirred nor fountain fell.    460
 A king and queen thus lived they long,         
 and Doriath was filled with song,              
 and all the Elves that missed their way        
 and never found the western bay,               
 the gleaming walls of their long home       465
 by the grey seas and the white foam,           
 who never trod the golden land                 
 where the towers of the Valar stand,           
 all these were gathered in their realm         
 beneath the beech and oak and elm.          470
                                               
   In later days when Morgoth first,            
 fleeing the Gods, their bondage burst,         
 and on the mortal lands set feet,              
 and in the North his mighty seat               
 founded and fortified, and all              475
 the newborn race of Men were thrall            
 unto his power, and Elf and Gnome              
 his slaves, or wandered without home,          
 or scattered fastnesses walled with fear       
 upraised upon his borders drear,            480
 and each one fell, yet reigned there still     
 in Doriath beyond his will                     
 Thingol and deathless Melian,                  
 whose magic yet no evil can                    
 that cometh from without surpass.           485
 Here still was laughter and green grass,       
 and leaves were lit with the white sun,        
 and many marvels were begun.                   
                                               
   In sunshine and in sheen of moon,            
 with silken robe and silver shoon,          490

 the daughter of the deathless queen             
 now danced on the undying green,                
 half elven-fair and half divine;                
 and when the stars began to shine               
 unseen but near a piping woke,               495
 and in the branches of an oak,                  
 or seated on the beech-leaves brown,            
 Dairon the dark with ferny crown                
 played with bewildering wizard's art            
 music for breaking of the heart.            500
 Such players have there only been               
 thrice in all Elfinesse, I ween:                
 Tinfang Gelion who still the moon               
 enchants on summer nights of June               
 and kindles the pale firstling star;        505
 and he who harps upon the far                   
 forgotten beaches and dark shores               
 where western foam for ever roars,              
 Maglor whose voice is like the sea;             
 and Dairon, mightiest of the three.         510
                                                
 Now it befell on summer night,                  
 upon a lawn where lingering light               
 yet lay and faded faint and grey,               
 that Luthien danced while he did play.          
 The chestnuts on the turf had shed          515
 their flowering candles, white and red;         
 there darkling stood a silent elm               
 and pale beneath its shadow-helm                
 there glimmered faint the umbels thick          
 of hemlocks like a mist, and quick          520
 the moths on pallid wings of white              
 with tiny eyes of fiery light                   
 were fluttering softly, and the voles           
 crept out to listen from their holes;           
 the little owls were hushed and still;      525
 the moon was yet behind the hill.               
 Her arms like ivory were gleaming,              
 her long hair like a cloud was streaming,       
 her feet atwinkle wandered roaming              
 in misty mazes in the gloaming;             530
 and glowworms shimmered round her feet,         

            
                                                  
 and moths in moving garland fleet                 
 above her head went wavering wan -                
 and this the moon now looked upon,                
 uprisen slow, and round, and white,          535
 above the branches of the night.                  
 Then clearly thrilled her voice and rang;         
 with sudden ecstasy she sang                      
 a song of nightingales she learned                
 and with her elvish magic turned             540
 to such bewildering delight                       
 the moon hung moveless in the night.              
 And this it was that Beren heard,                 
 and this he saw, without a word,                  
 enchanted dumb, yet filled with fire         545
 of such a wonder and desire                       
 that all his mortal mind was dim;                 
 her magic bound and fettered him,                 
 and faint he leaned against a tree.               
 Forwandered, wayworn, gaunt was he,          550
 his body sick and heart gone cold,                
 grey in his hair, his youth turned old;           
 for those that tread that lonely way              
 a price of woe and anguish pay.                   
 And now his heart was healed and slain       555
 with a new life and with new pain.                
                                                  
  He gazed, and as he gazed her hair               
 within its cloudy web did snare                   
 the silver moonbeams sifting white                
 between the leaves, and glinting bright        560
 the tremulous starlight of the skies              
 was caught and mirrored in her eyes.              
 Then all his journey's lonely fare,               
 the hunger and the haggard care,                  
 the awful mountains' stones he stained         565
 with blood of weary feet, and gained              
 only a land of ghosts, and fear                   
 in dark ravines imprisoned sheer -                
 there mighty spiders wove their webs,             
 old creatures foul with birdlike nebs          570
 that span their traps in dizzy air,               
 and filled it with clinging black despair,        

 and there they lived, and the sucked bones       
 lay white beneath on the dank stones -           
 now all these horrors like a cloud           575
 faded from mind. The waters loud                 
 falling from pineclad heights no more            
 he heard, those waters grey and frore            
 that bittersweet he drank and filled             
 his mind with madness - all was stilled.     580
 He recked not now the burning road,              
 the paths demented where he strode               
 endlessly... and ever new                        
 horizons stretched before his view,              
 as each blue ridge with bleeding feet        585
 was climbed, and down he went to meet            
 battle with creatures old and strong             
 and monsters in the dark, and long,              
 long watches in the haunted night                
 while evil shapes with baleful light         590
 in clustered eyes did crawl and snuff            
 beneath his tree - not half enough               
 the price he deemed to come at last              
 to that pale moon when day had passed,           
 to those clear stars of Elfinesse,           595
 the hearts-ease and the loveliness.              
                                                 
 Lo! all forgetting he was drawn                  
 unheeding toward the glimmering lawn             
 by love and wonder that compelled                
 his feet from hiding; music welled           600
 within his heart, and songs unmade               
 on themes unthought-of moved and swayed          
 his soul with sweetness; out he came,            
 a shadow in the moon's pale flame -              
 and Dairon's flute as sudden stops           605
 as lark before it steeply drops,                 
 as grasshopper within the grass                  
 listening for heavy feet to pass.                
 'Flee, Luthien!', and'Luthien!'                  
 from hiding Dairon called again;             610
 'A stranger walks the woods! Away! '             
 But Luthien would wondering stay;                
 fear had she never felt or known,                

                                             
                                               
 till fear then seized her, all alone,          
 seeing that shape with shagged hair        615
 and shadow long that halted there.             
 Then sudden she vanished like a dream          
 in dark oblivion, a gleam                      
 in hurrying clouds, for she had leapt          
 among the hemlocks tall, and crept         620
 under a mighty plant with leaves               
 all long and dark, whose stem in sheaves       
 upheld an hundred umbels fair;                 
 and her white arms and shoulders bare          
 her raiment pale, and in her hair          625
 the wild white roses glimmering there,         
 all lay like spattered moonlight hoar          
 in gleaming pools upon the floor.              
 Then stared he wild in dumbness bound          
 at silent trees, deserted ground;          630
 he blindly groped across the glade             
 to the dark trees' encircling shade,           
 and, while she watched with veiled eyes,       
 touched her soft arm in sweet surprise.        
 Like startled moth from deathlike sleep    635
 in sunless nook or bushes deep                 
 she darted swift, and to and fro               
 with cunning that elvish dancers know          
 about the trunks of trees she twined           
 a path fantastic. Far behind               640
 enchanted, wildered and forlorn                
 Beren came blundering, bruised and torn:        
 Esgalduin the elven-stream,                    
 in which amid tree-shadows gleam               
 the stars, flowed strong before his feet.  645
 Some secret way she found, and fleet           
 passed over and was seen no more,              
 and left him forsaken on the shore.            
 'Darkly the sundering flood rolls past!        
 To this my long way comes at last -        650
 a hunger and a loneliness,                     
 enchanted waters pitiless.'                    
                                               
   A summer waned, an autumn glowed,            
 and Beren in the woods abode,                  

 as wild and wary as a faun                   655
 that sudden wakes at rustling dawn,             
 and flits from shade to shade, and flees        
 the brightness of the sun, yet sees             
 all stealthy movements in the wood.             
 The murmurous warmth in weathers good,       660
 the hum of many wings, the call                 
 of many a bird, the pattering fall              
 of sudden rain upon the trees,                  
 the windy tide in leafy seas,                   
 the creaking of the boughs, he heard;        665
 but not the song of sweetest bird               
 brought joy or comfort to his heart,            
 a wanderer dumb who dwelt apart;                
 who sought unceasing and in vain                
 to hear and see those things again:          670
 a song more fair than nightingale,              
 a wonder in the moonlight pale.                 
                                                
   An autumn waned, a winter laid                
 the withered leaves in grove and glade;         
 the beeches bare were gaunt and grey,        675
 and red their leaves beneath them lay.          
 From cavern pale the moist moon eyes            
 the white mists that from earth arise           
 to hide the morrow's sun and drip               
 all the grey day from each twig's tip.       680
 By dawn and dusk he seeks her still;            
 by noon and night in valleys chill,             
 nor hears a sound but the slow beat             
 on sodden leaves of his own feet.               
                                                
 The wind of winter winds his horn;           685
 the misty veil is rent and torn.                 
 The wind dies; the starry choirs                
 leap in the silent sky to fires,                
 whose light comes bitter-cold and sheer         
 through domes of frozen crystal clear.       690
                                                
 A sparkle through the darkling trees,           
 a piercing glint of light he sees,              
 and there she dances all alone                  
 upon a treeless knoll of stone!                 

         
                                                 
 Her mantle blue with jewels white              695
 caught all the rays of frosted light.            
 She shone with cold and wintry flame,            
 as dancing down the hill she came,               
 and passed his watchful silent gaze,             
 a glimmer as of stars ablaze.                 700
 And snowdrops sprang beneath her feet,           
 and one bird, sudden, late and sweet,            
 shrilled as she wayward passed along.            
 A frozen brook to bubbling song                  
 awoke and laughed; but Beren stood            705
 still bound enchanted in the wood.               
 Her starlight faded and the night                
 closed o'er the snowdrops glimmering white.      
                                                 
 Thereafter on a hillock green                    
 he saw far off the elven-sheen                710
 of shining limb and jewel bright                 
 often and oft on moonlit night;                  
 and Dairon's pipe awoke once more,               
 and soft she sang as once before.                
 Then nigh he stole beneath the trees,         715
 and heartache mingled with hearts-ease.          
                                                 
  A night there was when winter died;             
 then all alone she sang and cried                
 and danced until the dawn of spring,             
 and chanted some wild magic thing             720
 that stirred him, till it sudden broke           
 the bonds that held him, and he woke             
 to madness sweet and brave despair.              
 He flung his arms to the night air,              
 and out he danced unheeding, fleet,           725
 enchanted, with enchanted feet.                  
 He sped towards the hillock green,               
 the lissom limbs, the dancing sheen;             
 he leapt upon the grassy hill                    
 his arms with loveliness to fill:             730
 his arms were empty, and she fled;               
 away, away her white feet sped.                  
 But as she went he swiftly came                  
 and called her with the tender name              
 of nightingales in elvish tongue,             735

    that all the woods now sudden rung:                           
    'Tinuviel! Tinuviel!'                                         
    And clear his voice was as a bell;                            
    its echoes wove a binding spell:                              
    'Tinuviel! Tinuviel! '                                   740
    His voice such love and longing filled                        
    one moment stood she, fear was stilled;                       
    one moment only; like a flame                                 
    he leaped towards her as she stayed                           
    and caught and kissed that elfin maid.                   745
                                                                 
    As love there woke in sweet surprise                          
    the starlight trembled in her eyes.                           
    A! Luthien! A! Luthien!                                       
    more fair than any child of Men;                              
    0! loveliest maid of Elfinesse,                          750
    what madness does thee now possess!                           
    A! lissom limbs and shadowy hair                              
    and chaplet of white snowdrops there;                         
    0! starry diadem and white                                    
    pale hands beneath the pale moonlight!                   755
    She left his arms and slipped away                            
    just at the breaking of the day.                              
                                                                 
                           NOTES.                                 
                                                                 
 439. Original reading of B:                                       
                                                                 
                 from gardens of the God of Sleep,                
                                                                 
 457. Original reading of B:                                       
                                                                 
                 the Gods drink in their golden halls             
                                                                 
 467-8. Original reading of B:                                   
                                                                 
                 who never passed the golden gate                 
                 where doorwards of the Gods do wait,             
                                                                 
   These three changes are late,  and their  purpose is  to remove
   the word Gods.  The change  in line  468 also  gets rid  of the
   purely metrical do in do wait; similarly did build and fortify
   >  founded  and  fortified  475  and did  raise >  upraised 480
   look as if they belong to the same time. On the other  hand did

           flutter   >   were   fluttering   523   and   did   waver   >  ment
           wavering  533  seem  to  belong  with  the early  emendations (see
           C.  S.  Lewis's  commentary,  pp.  320 -   1).  I   mention  these
           changes   here  to   illustrate  my   remarks  on   this  subject,
                                                                             
           pp. 152-3.                                                         
    493.   elfin- B, emended to elven-. Here and subsequently this            
           belongs with the early changes, as does elfin to elvish at 540,
           etc.                                                               
    503.   Tinfang Warble A, and B as typed; Gelion an early change           
           in B.                                                              
    508.   After this line A has a couplet omitted in B:                      
                                                                             
                           from England unto Eglamar                          
                           on rock and dune and sandy bar,                    
                                                                             
           The first of these lines  occurs also  in an  early draft  for the
           opening of the poem, see p. 157, note to lines I - 30.            
    509.   Maglor  A,  B;  in  the rough  draft of  this passage  Ivare (with
           Maglor written beside it).                                         
 527-30.   Marked in B with  an X  (i.e. in  need of  revision), but  with no
           other verses substituted.                                          
    557.   This line begins a new page  in the  A manuscript;  at the  top of
           the      page      is      written     the      date     2318125'.
    558.   golden  A,  and  B  as  typed  (no  doubt  an   oversight),  early
           emended  to cloudy.  See note  to lines  1 -  30, and  pp. 159-60.
    648.   After this  line the  bundle of  examination-scripts on  which the
           A  manuscript  is  written  (p.  150)  is  interleaved  with other
           pages,  which carry  the poem  to the  end of  Canto III.  At the
           bottom of the first of these  pages is  written Filey  l925, where
           my father was on holiday in September of that year.                
    743    The couplet lacks its second line. The passage 741 - 5 is  a hasty
           revision, based  on a  criticism of  Lewis's; see  his commentary,
                                                                             
            P- 325.                                                           
                                                                             
                          Commentary on Canto III.                          
                                                                             
 In this Canto there are many things that derive from the Tale of Tinuviel
  (II. 10ff.): the chestnut trees, the white moths, the moon rising, the
   sudden ceasing of Dairon's piping, Tinuviel's unwillingness to flee, her
  hiding under the hemlocks like spattered moonlight (cf. II. x x 'like a
  spatter of moonlight shimmering'), Beren's touching her arm, her dart-
  ing between the tree-trunks, and afterwards the 'treeless knoll' where she
  danced in the winter. But the Canto is also related to the poem Light as
  Leaf on Lindentree (see pp. 108 - 10, 120 - 2), which had been published
  in June 1925, while this part of the Lay of Leithian was written a little
  later in the same year. Echoes of the one poem are heard in the other, and

  more  than  an  echo  in  the  line  and  out  he  danced  unheeding, fleet,
  which is found in both (p. 109, line 447; p. 179, line 725).                
    The aberrant names  in the  first two  Cantos of  A have  now disappeared
  from the text. In the second  Canto my  father had  already given  back the
  name Celegorm to the  son of  Feanor (note  to line  304), and  now Thingol
  appears  in  A;  Luthien  replaces  Melilot;  and  Beren  replaces  Maglor.
  Morgoth now replaces Bauglir in A (see p. 170).                            
    In both texts Tinuviel is now  explicitly the  Elvish word  for 'nightin-
  gale' (line 735; see p. 124); and Maglor, again in both texts, is  the name
  of one of the three greatest singers of Elfinesse:                         
                                                                            
                    he    who    harps   upon    the   far                   
                    forgotten  beaches  and   dark  shores                   
                    where  western  foam  for  ever roars,                   
                    Maglor whose voice is like the sea  (506-9)               
                                                                            
  In the rough draft of this  passage the  name of  this minstrel  is however
  Ivare (though Maglor is written  beside it),  and Ivare  was named  in the
  Tale of Tinuviel (II. 10), with Tinfang and  Dairon, as  one of  'the three
  most magic players of the Elves', who 'plays beside the  sea'. This  is the
  first hint of the after-history of Maglor son of Feanor, who in the Tale of
  the Nauglafring (II. 241) was slain, as  also was  Celegorm, in  the attack
  on Dior. The lines in A, omitted in B (note to line 508),  are interesting:
                                                                            
                       from England unto Eglamar                             
                       on rock and dune and sandy bar                        
                                                                            
  The  form  Eglamar  (Gnomish,  =   Eldamar)  occurs   in  the   very  early
  poem The Shores of  Faery and  its prose  preface (II.  262, 272);  and the
  same  line  from  England  unto  Eglamar  is  found  in the  rough workings
  of  the  beginning  of  the  Lay (note  to lines  1 -  30). The  mention of
  England is a  reminder that  at this  time the  association of  the legends
  with Eriol/AElfwine was still  very much  alive, though  there is  no other
  indication of it in the Lay of Leithian.                                   
    Tinfang Warble  reappears from  the Lost  Tales at  line 503,  changed to
  Tinfang Gelion; the meaning of Gelion is not explained.                    
                                                                            
    In one respect only does  the narrative  content of  the Canto  depart in
  any significant way from the common 'tradition' of the  texts, but  this is
  sufficiently remarkable: the Elves departed over the sea to Valinor  at the
  end of the Great Journey in a fleet of ships!                              
                                                                            
                   Yet all his kin now marched away,                         
                   as old tales tell, to seek the bay                        
                   on the last shore of mortal lands,                        
                   where mighty ships with magic hands                       
                   they made, and sailed beyond the seas. (427 - 31)       
                                                                            
  This is very strange (and I am at a loss to account for it, except by the

  obvious explanation of a passing shift), in that the story of the 'island-car'
  (Tol Eressea), which goes  back to  the Lost  Tales (I.  118-20),  is present
  in all the versions of 'The Silmarillion'.  The Elves  are here  presented, on
  the  other hand,  as great  shipbuilders in  the beginning  of their  days. -
  With the reference in  the passage  just cited  to the  bay whence  the Elves
  set sail cf. The Silmarillion p. 57, where it  is told  that Ulmo  anchored the
  'island-car'  in  the  Bay  of  Balar  (and  that  the eastern  horn of  the island,
  breaking off, was the Isle of Balar).                                             
                                                                                
     In the description of Beren's journey  to Doriath  in lines  563 ff.  is the
  first account  of the  Ered Gorgoroth,  the Mountains  of Terror  (called 'the
  Shadowy  Mountains'  in  Canto  II,  see  pp. 170-1),  with their  spiders and
  their  waters  that  drove  mad  those who  drank from  them (cf.  The Silmaril-
  lion  p.  121; and  with lines  590 - 1 evil  shapes arith  baleful light/in
  clustered  eyes  cf.  ibid.  p.  164: 'monsters...  hunting silently  with many
  eyes').                                                                        
                                                                                
                                       IV.                                       
                                                                                
                He lay upon the leafy mould,                                     
                his face upon earth's bosom cold,                                
                aswoon in overwhelming bliss,                                760
                enchanted of an elvish kiss,                                     
                seeing within his darkened eyes                                  
                the light that for no darkness dies,                             
                the loveliness that doth not fade,                               
                though all in ashes cold be laid.                            765
                Then folded in the mists of sleep                                
                he sank into abysses deep,                                       
                drowned in an overwhelming grief                                 
                for parting after meeting brief;                                 
                a shadow and a fragrance fair                                770
                lingered, and waned, and was not there.                          
                Forsaken, barren, bare as stone,                                 
                the daylight found him cold, alone.                              
                                                                                
                 'Where art thou gone? The day is bare,                          
                 the sunlight dark, and cold the air!                        775
                 Tinuviel, where went thy feet?                                  
                 0 wayward star! 0 maiden sweet!                                 
                 0 flower of Elfland all too fair                                
                 for mortal heart! The woods are bare!                           

 The woods are bare! ' he rose and cried.        780
 'Ere spring was born, the spring hath died!'        
 And wandering in path and mind                       
 he groped as one gone sudden blind,                  
 who seeks to grasp the hidden light                  
 with faltering hands in more than night.        785
                                                     
   And thus in anguish Beren paid                     
 for that great doom upon him laid,                   
 the deathless love of Luthien,                       
 too fair for love of mortal Men;                     
 and in his doom was Luthien snared,             790
 the deathless in his dying shared;                   
 and Fate them forged a binding chain                 
 of living love and mortal pain.                      
                                                     
   Beyond all hope her feet returned                  
 at eve, when in the sky there burned            795
 the flame of stars; and in her eyes                  
 there trembled the starlight of the skies,           
 and from her hair the fragrance fell                 
 of elvenflowers in elven-dell.                       
                                                     
 Thus Luthien, whom no pursuit,                  800
 no snare, no dart that hunters shoot,                
 might hope to win or hold, she came                  
 at the sweet calling of her name;                    
 and thus in his her slender hand                     
 was linked in far Beleriand;                    805
 in hour enchanted long ago                           
 her arms about his neck did go,                      
 and gently down she drew to rest                     
 his weary head upon her breast.                      
 A! Luthien, Tinuviel,                           810
 why wentest thou to darkling dell                    
 with shining eyes and dancing pace,                  
 the twilight glimmering in thy face?                 
 Each day before the end of eve                       
 she sought her love, nor would him leave,       815
 until the stars were dimmed, and day                 
 came glimmering eastward silver-grey.                
 Then trembling-veiled she would appear               
 and dance before him, half in fear;                  

                                                   
                                                    
 there flitting just before his feet             820
 she gently chid with laughter sweet:                
 'Come! dance now, Beren, dance with me!             
 For fain thy dancing I would see.                   
 Come! thou must woo with nimbler feet,              
 than those who walk where mountains meet        825
 the bitter skies beyond this realm                  
 of marvellous moonlit beech and elm.'               
                                                    
 In Doriath Beren long ago                           
 new art and lore he learned to know;                
 his limbs were freed; his eyes alight,          830
 kindled with a new enchanted sight;                 
 and to her dancing feet his feet                    
 attuned went dancing free and fleet;                
 his laughter welled as from a spring                
 of music, and his voice would sing              835
 as voices of those in Doriath                       
 where paved with flowers are floor and path.        
 The year thus on to summer rolled,                  
 from spring to a summertime of gold.                
                                                    
 Thus fleeting fast their short hour flies,      840
 while Dairon watches with fiery eyes,               
 haunting the gloom of tangled trees                 
 all day, until at night he sees                     
 in the fickle moon their moving feet,               
 two lovers linked in dancing sweet,             845
 two shadows shimmering on the green                 
 where lonely-dancing maid had been.                 
 'Hateful art thou, 0 Land of Trees!                 
 May fear and silence on thee seize!                 
 My flute shall fall from idle hand              850
 and mirth shall leave Beleriand;                    
 music shall perish and voices fail                  
 and trees stand dumb in dell and dale!'            
                                                    
    It seemed a hush had fallen there                
 upon the waiting woodland air;                  855
 and often murmured Thingol's folk                   
 in wonder, and to their king they spoke:            
 'This spell of silence who hath wrought?            
 What web hath Dairon's music caught?                


 It seems the very birds sing low;         860
 murmurless Esgalduin doth flow;                 
 the leaves scarce whisper on the trees,         
 and soundless beat the wings of bees! '         
                                                
 This Luthien heard, and there the queen         
 her sudden glances saw unseen.              865
 But Thingol marvelled, and he sent              
 for Dairon the piper, ere he went               
 and sat upon his mounded seat -                 
 his grassy throne by the grey feet              
 of the Queen of Beeches, Hirilorn,          870
 upon whose triple piers were borne              
 the mightiest vault of leaf and bough           
 from world's beginning until now.               
 She stood above Esgalduin's shore,              
 where long slopes fell beside the door,     875
 the guarded gates, the portals stark            
 of the Thousand echoing Caverns dark.           
 There Thingol sat and heard no sound            
 save far off footsteps on the ground;           
 no flute, no voice, no song of bird,        880
 no choirs of windy leaves there stirred;        
 and Dairon coming no word spoke,                
 silent amid the woodland folk.                  
 Then Thingol said: '0 Dairon fair,              
 thou master of all musics rare,             885
 0 magic heart and wisdom wild,                  
 whose ear nor eye may be beguiled,              
 what omen doth this silence bear?               
 What horn afar upon the air,                    
 what summons do the woods await?            890
 Mayhap the Lord Tavros from his gate            
 and tree-propped halls, the forest-god,         
 rides his wild stallion golden-shod             
 amid the trumpets' tempest loud,                
 amid his green-clad hunters proud,          895
 leaving his deer and friths divine              
 and emerald forests? Some faint sign            
 of his great onset may have come                
 upon the Western winds, and dumb                
 the woods now listen for a chase            900

 that here once more shall thundering race      
 beneath the shade of mortal trees.             
 Would it were so! The Lands of Ease            
 hath Tavros left not many an age,              
 since Morgoth evil wars did wage,           905
 since ruin fell upon the North                 
 and the Gnomes unhappy wandered forth.         
 But if not he, who comes or what?'            
 And Dairon answered: 'He cometh not!           
 No feet divine shall leave that shore,      910
 where the Shadowy Seas' last surges roar,      
 till many things be come to pass,              
 and many evils wrought. Alas!                  
 the guest is here. The woods are still,        
 but wait not; for a marvel chill            915
 them holds at the strange deeds they see,      
 but kings see not - though queens, maybe,      
 may guess, and maidens, maybe, know.           
 Where one went lonely two now go! '            
                                               
 'Whither thy riddle points is plain'        920
 the king in anger said, 'but deign             
 to make it plainer! Who is he                  
 that earns my wrath? How walks he free         
 within my woods amid my folk,                  
 a stranger to both beech and oak?'         925
 But Dairon looked on Luthien                   
 and would he had not spoken then,              
 and no more would he speak that day,           
 though Thingol's face with wrath was grey.     
 Then Luthien stepped lightly forth:         930
 'Far in the mountain-leaguered North,          
 my father,' said she, 'lies the land           
 that groans beneath King Morgoth's hand.       
 Thence came one hither', bent and worn         
 in wars and travail, who had sworn          935
 undying hatred of that king;                   
 the last of Beor's sons, they sing,            
 and even hither far and deep                   
 within thy woods the echoes creep              
 through the wild mountain-passes cold,      940
 the last of Beor's house to hold               

 a sword unconquered, neck unbowed,               
 a heart by evil power uncowed.                   
 No evil needst thou think or fear                
 of Beren son of Barahir!                      945
 If aught thou hast to say to him,                
 then swear to hurt not flesh nor limb,           
 and I will lead him to thy hall,                 
 a son of kings, no mortal thrall.'               
   Then long King Thingol looked on her        950
 while hand nor foot nor tongue did stir,         
 and Melian, silent, unamazed,                    
 on Luthien and Thingol gazed.                    
 'No blade nor chain his limbs shall mar'         
 the king then swore. 'He wanders far,         955
 and news, mayhap, he hath for me,                
 and words I have for him, maybe! '               
 Now Thingol bade them all depart                 
 save Dairon, whom he called: 'What art,          
 what wizardry of Northern mist                960
 hath this illcomer brought us? List!             
 Tonight go thou by secret path,                  
 who knowest all wide Doriath,                    
 and watch that Luthien - daughter mine,          
 what madness doth thy heart entwine,          965
 what web from Morgoth's dreadful halls           
 hath caught thy feet and thee enthralls! -       
 that she bid not this Beren flee                 
 back whence he came. I would him see!            
 Take with thee woodland archers wise.         970
 Let naught beguile your hearts or eyes! '        
                                                 
 Thus Dairon heavyhearted did,                    
 and the woods were filled with watchers hid;     
 yet needless, for Luthien that night             
 led Beren by the golden light                 975
 of mounting moon unto the shore                  
 and bridge before her father's door;             
 and the white light silent looked within         
 the waiting portals yawning dim.                 
                                                 
   Downward  with  gentle  hand   she  led     980
 through   corridors   of   carven   dread        
 whose  turns  were  lit by  lanterns hung        

 or flames from torches that were flung          
 on dragons hewn in the cold stone               
 with jewelled eyes and teeth of bone.      985
 Then sudden, deep beneath the earth             
 the silences with silver mirth                  
 were shaken and the rocks were ringing,         
 the birds of Melian were singing;               
 and wide the ways of shadow spread         990
 as into arched halls she led                    
 Beren in wonder. There a light                  
 like day immortal and like night                
 of stars unclouded, shone and gleamed.          
 A vault of topless trees it seemed,        995
 whose trunks of carven stone there stood        
 like towers of an enchanted wood                
 in magic fast for ever bound,                   
 bearing a roof whose branches wound             
 in endless tracery of green               1000
 lit by some leaf-emprisoned sheen               
 of moon and sun, and wrought of gems,           
 and each leaf hung on golden stems.             
 Lo! there amid immortal flowers                  
 the nightingales in shining bowers         1005
 sang o'er the head of Melian,                   
 while water for ever dripped and ran            
 from fountains in the rocky floor.              
 There Thingol sat. His crown he wore            
 of green and silver, and round his chair   1010
 a host in gleaming armour fair.                 
 Then Beren looked upon the king                 
 and stood amazed; and swift a ring              
 of elvish weapons hemmed him round.             
 Then Beren looked upon the ground,         1015
 for Melian's gaze had sought his face,          
 and dazed there drooped he in that place,       
 and when the king spake deep and slow:          
 'Who art thou stumblest hither? Know            
 that none unbidden seek this throne        1020
 and ever leave these halls of stone! '          
 no word he answered, filled with dread.         
 But Luthien answered in his stead:              
 'Behold, my father, one who came                

 pursued by hatred like a flame!              1025
 Lo! Beren son of Barahir!                         
 What need hath he thy wrath to fear,              
 foe of our foes, without a friend,                
 whose knees to Morgoth do not bend?'              
                                                  
 'Let Beren answer! ' Thingol said.           1030
 'What wouldst thou here? What hither led          
 thy wandering feet, 0 mortal wild?                
 How hast thou Luthien beguiled                    
 or darest thus to walk this wood                  
 unasked, in secret? Reason good              1035
 'twere best declare now if thou may,              
 or never again see light of day! '                
 Then Beren looked in Luthien's eyes               
 and saw a light of starry skies,                  
 and thence was slowly drawn his gaze         1040
 to Melian's face. As from a maze                  
 of wonder dumb he woke; his heart                 
 the bonds of awe there burst apart                
 and filled with the fearless pride of old;        
 in his glance now gleamed an anger cold.     1045
 'My feet hath fate, 0 king,' he said,             
 'here over the mountains bleeding led,            
 and what I sought not I have found,               
 and love it is hath here me bound.                
 Thy dearest treasure I desire;               1050
 nor rocks nor steel nor Morgoth's fire            
 nor all the power of Elfinesse                    
 shall keep that gem I would possess.              
 For fairer than are born to Men                   
 A daughter hast thou, Luthien.'              1055
                                                  
   Silence then fell upon the hall;                
 like graven stone there stood they all,           
 save one who cast her eyes aground,               
 and one who laughed with bitter sound.            
 Dairon the piper leant there pale            1060
 against a pillar. His fingers frail               
 there touched a flute that whispered not;         
 his eyes were dark; his heart was hot.            
 'Death is the guerdon thou hast earned,           
 0 baseborn mortal, who hast learned          1065

                                               
                                                        
 in Morgoth's realm to spy and lurk                      
 like Orcs that do his evil work! '                      
 'Death! ' echoed Dairon fierce and low,                 
 but Luthien trembling gasped in woe.                    
 'And death,'said Thingol, 'thou shouldst taste, 1070
 had I not sworn an oath in haste                        
 that blade nor chain thy flesh should mar.              
 Yet captive bound by never a bar,                       
 unchained, unfettered, shalt thou be                    
 in lightless labyrinth endlessly                 1075
                                                        
 that coils about my halls profound                      
 by magic bewildered and enwound;                        
 there wandering in hopelessness                         
 thou shalt learn the power of Elfinesse!'              
 'That may not be! ' Lo! Beren spake,              1080
 and through the king's words coldly brake.              
 'What are thy mazes but a chain                         
 wherein the captive blind is slain?                     
 Twist not thy oaths, 0 elvish king,                     
 like faithless Morgoth! By this ring -            1085
 the token of a lasting bond                             
 that Felagund of Nargothrond                            
 once swore in love to Barahir,                          
 who sheltered him with shield and spear                 
 and saved him from pursuing foe                   1090
 on Northern battlefields long ago -                     
 death thou canst give unearned to me,                   
 but names I will not take from thee                     
 of baseborn, spy, or Morgoth's thrall!                  
 Are these the ways of Thingol's hall? '           1095
 Proud are the words, and all there turned               
 to see the jewels green that burned                     
 in Beren's ring. These Gnomes had set                   
 as eyes of serpents twined that met                     
 beneath a golden crown of flowers,                1100
 that one upholds and one devours:                       
 the badge that Finrod made of yore                      
 and Felagund his son now bore.                          
 His anger was chilled, but little less,                 
 and dark thoughts Thingol did possess,            1105
 though Melian the pale leant to his side                
 and whispered: '0 king, forgo thy pride!                

 Such is my counsel. Not by thee                    
 shall Beren be slain, for far and free             
 from these deep halls his fate doth lead,    1110
 yet wound with thine. 0 king, take heed! '         
 But Thingol looked on Luthien.                     
 'Fairest of Elves! Unhappy Men,                    
 children of little lords and kings                 
 mortal and frail, these fading things,       1115
 shall they then look with love on thee?'           
 his heart within him thought. 'I see               
 thy ring,' he said, '0 mighty man!                 
 But to win the child of Melian                     
 a father's deeds shall not avail,            1120
 nor thy proud words at which I quail.              
 A treasure dear I too desire,                      
 but rocks and steel and Morgoth's fire             
 from all the powers of Elfinesse                   
 do keep the jewel I would possess.           1125
 Yet bonds like these I hear thee say               
 affright thee not. Now go thy way!                 
 Bring me one shining Silmaril                      
 from Morgoth's crown, then if she will,            
 may Luthien set her hand in thine;           1130
 then shalt thou have this jewel of mine.'          
                                                   
 Then Thingol's warriors loud and long              
 they laughed; for wide renown in song              
 had Feanor's gems o'er land and sea,               
 the peerless Silmarils; and three            1135
 alone he made and kindled slow                     
 in the land of the Valar long ago,                 
 and there in Tun of their own light                
 they shone like marvellous stars at night,         
 in the great.Gnomish hoards of Tun,          1140
 while Glingal flowered and Belthil's bloom         
 yet lit the land beyond the shore                  
 where the Shadowy Seas' last surges roar,          
 ere Morgoth stole them and the Gnomes              
 seeking their glory left their homes,        1145
 ere sorrows fell on Elves and Men,                 
 ere Beren was or Luthien,                          
 ere Feanor's sons in madness swore                 

                                                  
                                                    
 their dreadful oath. But now no more                
 their beauty was seen, save shining clear      1150
 in Morgoth's dungeons vast and drear.               
 His iron crown they must adorn,                     
 and gleam above Orcs and slaves forlorn,            
 treasured in Hell above all wealth,                 
 more than his eyes; and might nor stealth      1155
 could touch them, or even gaze too long             
 upon their magic. Throng on throng                  
 of Orcs with reddened scimitars                     
 encircled him, and mighty bars                      
 and everlasting gates and walls,               1160
 who wore them now amidst his thralls.               
 Then Beren laughed more loud than they              
 in bitterness, and thus did say:                    
 'For little price do elven-kings                    
 their daughters sell - for gems and rings      1165
 and things of gold! If such thy will,               
 thy bidding I will now fulfill.                     
 On Beren son of Barahir                             
 thou hast not looked the last, I fear.              
 Farewell, Tinuviel, starlit maiden!            1170
 Ere the pale winter pass snowladen,                 
 I will return, not thee to buy                      
 with any jewel in Elfinesse,                        
 but to find my love in loveliness,                  
 a flower that grows beneath the sky.'          1175
 Bowing before Melian and the king                   
 he turned, and thrust aside the ring                
 of guards about him, and was gone,                  
 and his footsteps faded one by one                  
 in the dark corridors. 'A guileful oath        1180
 thou sworest, father! Thou hast both                
 to blade and chain his flesh now doomed             
 in Morgoth's dungeons deep entombed,'               
 said Luthien, and welling tears                     
 sprang in her eyes, and hideous fears          1185
 clutched at her heart. All looked away,             
 and later remembered the sad day                    
 whereafter Luthien no more sang.                    
 Then clear in the silence the cold words rang       
 of Melian: 'Counsel cunning-wise,              1190

           O king! ' she said. 'Yet if mine eyes                                  
           lose not their power, 'twere well for thee                             
           that Beren failed his errantry.                                        
           Well for thee, but for thy child                                       
           a dark doom and a wandering wild.'                             1195
                                                                                 
           'I sell not to Men those whom I love'                                  
           said Thingol, 'whom all things above                                   
           I cherish; and if hope there were                                      
           that Beren should ever living fare                                     
           to the Thousand Caves once more, I swear                        1200
           he should not ever have seen the air                                   
           or light of heaven's stars again.'                                     
           But Melian smiled, and there was pain                                  
           as of far knowledge in her eyes;                                       
           for such is the sorrow of the wise.                             1205
                                                                                 
                                       NOTES.                                     
                                                                                 
 The  opening  of  this  Canto  is  extant in  two typescripts  (to line  863), the
 second  version  being  substantially  expanded;  it  was the  first of  them that
 C.  S.  Lewis  received  -  indeed, it  is clear  that the  rewriting was  in part
 due to his criticism.                                                            
                                                                                 
 758-863.  The rough drafts for this portion of the Lay (much briefer             
           than the later text here printed) were written on the backs of         
           booksellers' invoices dated 31 December 1925 and 2 February          
                                                                                 
           1926.                                                                 
    761.   In this Canto elvish rather than elfin is found already in A,          
           but still elfin in both texts at 1164 (emended in B to elven-).         
           elven- 799 occurs in a line found only in the later rewriting,         
           B(2).                                                                  
 762-73.   These lines are not in A; the B(1) version, severely criticised        
           by C. S. Lewis, is given with his commentary, p. 326.                  
 781-841.  A: and the bare woods nor moved nor sighed.                            
           Yet ever after when star or moon                                       
           shone clear or misty then came she soon                                
           just after day before the eve                                          
           and found him, nor his side did leave          5
           until night waned and starlight ceased                                 
           and day came pale o'er the pathless east.                              
           And there in far Broseliand                                            

                                                                       
                                                                            
              he learned the touches of her hand;                            
              his feet grew swift as unseen airs,                         10
              his laughter soft, and far his cares,                          
              his voice like those in Doriath                                
              that wander where there runs no path.                          
              Thus days of golden spring did rise                            
                                                                            
              while Dairon watched with fiery eyes                        15
                                                                            
            The  spelling  Broseliand  with  s  has  now entered  the A-text.
            B(1)  is as  A, except  that between  lines 7  and 8  above were
            inserted ten lines that my  father retained  in the  much longer
            B(2) text, 818 - 27 (Then trembling-veiled, &c.)                
     805.   Broseliand B (2), emended to Beleriand.                          
 849-51.    These  verses  are  an  emendation  to  B  (2)',  with Beleriand
            thus written. For  the B(1)  version criticised  by C.  S. Lewis
            and  the  B(2)  version  before  emendation  see   Lewis's  com-
            mentary, p. 327,                                                 
 89I, 904.  Tavros  was  emended  in  B to  Tauros, but  this seems  to have
            been  a much  later change.  The rough  workings here  had first
            the name (Ormain >) Ormaid, then Tavros.                         
     937.   Original  reading  of  B:  the last  of Men,  as songs  now sing
            (with like echoes 939)                                           
     941.   Original reading of B: the last of Men alone to hold             
   983-5.   These  lines  are  marked  with  an  X  on  the B-text,  and the
            words   on   dragons  underlined   and  marked   with  an   X  -
            presumably   because   the   creatures   of  Morgoth   were  not
            carved on the walls of the Thousand Caves.                       
   987-9.   These  lines  are  repeated  from  Canto  III,  lines 408-10.
    1010.   silver: original reading of B gold.                              
 1059-63 .  These lines are  marked with  an X  on the  B-text, as  also are
            lines 1068 - 9. It  may be  that my  father wished  to represent
            Dairon  as  less  unequivocally  hostile to  Beren, and  also as
            ashamed of his words to Thingol (909-19).                        
    1087.   A:         that         Celegorm          of         Nargothrond
            with   Celegorm   emended   first  to   Felagoth  and   then  to
            Felagund (as at line 304).                                      
    1098.   Gnomes: in the  margin of  B is  written Elves/smiths.  This is
            clearly a late change  intended simply  to get  rid of  the word
            Gnomes (see I. 43 - 4).                                          
 1102 -3.   A:     the     badge     that     Feanor     made     of    yore
            and Celegorm his son now bore.                                   
            Celegorm is not  emended here  as it  is at  line 1087,  but the
            couplet is enclosed within brackets in the manuscript.           
    1141.   Glingal,  Belthil:  original  readings  of  B  Glingol,  Bansil.
            The  same   changes  were   made  in   The  Children   of  Hurin
            (pp. 80 - 1, notes to lines 2027 - 8), where I retain the earlier
            forms.                                                           

                         1144-5. These lines are marked with an X on the B-text, perhaps
                                     simply because of the word Gnomes which here occurs in
                                rhyme and cannot be easily replaced (see note to 1098); but
                             C. S. Lewis criticised the word their in line 1145 as obscure
                                             in its reference (see his commentary, p. 329).
                         1151. A: in Morgoth Bauglir's dungeons drear. See p. 182.
                         1161. Here is written in the margin of the A manuscript: 'Mar. 27,
                               28 1928'.
                         1175. This line was not originally in A but was pencilled in with
                                 queried indications to place it either after 1172 or (with
                                             irregular rhyming) after 1174, as it is in B.
                                                                                             
                                   Commentary on Canto IV.                                   
                                                                                             
 Comparison  of  this  Canto  with  the  Tale  of  Tinuviel  shows  that  the                 
 narrative has undergone  a deepening  of significance,  and this  is largely                 
 brought  about by  the cardinal  change of  Beren's being  no longer  an Elf                 
 but  a  mortal Man  (see p.  171). The  story told  in the  poem is  that of                 
 The Silmarillion (pp. 165-8); for  the prose  version, close  to the  Lay in                 
 every  feature  large  and  small, and  indeed in  many actual  phrases, was                 
 based directly on  the verses,  and in  this Canto  the verses  underwent no                 
 significant later revision. There are some  elements in  the poem  that were                 
 not  taken  up  into  the  prose  version,  such as  the description  of the                 
 Thousand  Caves  (980  ff.),  whose  splendour and  beauty now  first appear                 
 (cf.  my remarks  on Thingol's  wealth, pp.  160-1) -  but a  description of                 
 Thingol's  dwelling  is given  earlier in  The Silmarillion,  p. 93.  In the                 
 original text of the Silmarillion version Daeron's part was in fact entirely                 
 excluded,  though  obviously  only  for  the  sake  of  compression  (it was                 
 reintroduced  into  the  published  work*). The  loud laughter  of Thingol's                 
 warriors at Thingol's demand that Beren fetch him a Silmaril  is not  in the                 
 prose  account,  and  was  perhaps   deliberately  excluded.   This  feature                 
 harks back  rather to  the scene  in the  Tale of  Tinuviel (II.  13), where                 
 Thingol  'burst into  laughter' at  the aspect  of Beren  as suitor  for his                 
 daughter,  and  where  the  courtiers  smiled   when  Thingol   requested  a                 
 Silmaril  as  the  bride-price,  seeing that  he 'treated  the matter  as an                 
 uncouth jest'. Cf. my commentary on the Tale, II. 53:                                       
                                                                                             
  The tone is altogether lighter and less grave than it afterwards became;                    
  in the jeering laughter of Thingol, who treats the matter as a  jest and                    
  Beren as a benighted fool, there is no hint of what is quite explicit in                    
  the  later  story:  'Thus  he  wrought  the  doom  of  Doriath,  and was                    
  ensnared within the curse of Mandos.'                                                       
                                                                                             
  Canto III was in being by the autumn of 1925; while against Canto IV                    
                                                                                             
 (* On  pp.  166, 172;  but the  passage concerning  Daeron on  p. 183  is original.  My father
 apparently intended to insert references to Daeron's betrayals of Luthien, but did not do so.)

  line 1161 in A there stands the date 27 -  8 March,  1928. The  rough drafts
  for the opening of I V (lines 758 - 863) are written on the backs of invoices
  dated  December  1925  and  February 1926,  but  this  does  not   show  very
  much.  In  any  case  it  seems  to  me  most improbable  that my  father was
  writing lines 758 - 1161 over a period of  two and  a half  years (September
  1925 to March 1928): it is far more  likely that  there was  a long  gap, and
       that this fourth Canto was written pretty much at one time. Other     
   evidence in fact suggests that he paused. There exist three pages of notes
    written on the backs of booksellers' invoices dated February, March, and
    May 1926, and these pages are of great interest for the development of the
 legend, for they contain a rapidly-composed plot-outline in which my
 father is seen working out the narrative of the next Cantos of the Lay.
 This outline I will refer to as 'Synopsis I'. I give here its content as far
       as the end of Canto IV. Contractions used for names are expanded, and
              passages struck out (done at the time of writing) are included.
                                                                              
      Beren and Tinuviel dance in the woods.                                   
      Dairon reports to the king.                                              
    Beren taken captive to the king.                                           
    Dairon will have him slain.                                                
      The king will shut him in his dungeons.                                  
    Tinuviel pleads.                                                           
    Melian [struck out: says  that he  must not  be slain,  and that]  refuses to
      advise  but  warns  Thingol  darkly  that  Beren  must  not  be   slain  by
      him, and his coming was not without fate.                                
    Thingol sends him for the Silmaril.                                        
    Beren's speech.                                                            
    Melian  says  [struck  out:  this  was better  than his  death, but]  it were
      better for Thingol if Beren succeeded not.                               
      Thingol  said  he  would  not  send  him  if  [he]  were going  to succeed.
      Melian smiles.                                                           
    Flight of Beren.                                                           
                                                                              
  In  the Tale  of Tinsuviel  Beren was  led by  Tinuviel into  Thingol's caves
  (II. 13), and as I noted (I I. 52-3):                                      
                                                                              
    The  betrayal  of  Beren  to Thingol  by Daeron...  has no  place in  the old
    story - there is nothing to betray; and indeed it  is not  shown in  the tale
    that  Dairon  knew  anything   whatsoever  of   Beren  before   Tinuviel  led
    him  into  the  cave,  beyond  having once  seen his  face in  the moonlight.
                                                                              
 Moreover, in the Tale Dairon  was Tinuviel's  brother (II.  10; see  p.124).
 In  the  Lay  (lines  909 ff.)  Dairon utters  strong hints  concerning the
 strange  quietness  of the  forest, which  lead directly  to a  declaration by
 Luthien  of Beren's  presence, and  a demand  that her  father shall  not harm
 him;  Thingol  swears  that  he  will not,  but sends  Dairon with  archers to
 prevent  Beren's  escape  -  needlessly,  for  Luthien  brings  him  that same

  night  to  Thingol's  hall.  This  first part  of Synopsis  I suggests  ideas that
  were  never  given  form.  Thus  Dairon  speaks  to  Thingol   of  Beren,   as  in
  the  Lay,  but  Beren  is  actually  apprehended  and  taken  to  the  king  as  a
  prisoner;  moreover  (while  it  is  of  course  impossible to  be certain  of the
  precise   articulation   of   the   plot   from   such  an   extremely  compressed
  outline)  Dairon  seems  more  actively  to  seek  Beren's death  than he  does in
  the  poem  (despite  line  1068),  and  Tinuviel   pleads  against   her  father's
  policy.                                                                           
                                                                                   
    For explanation of the references in A to Celegorm (notes to lines              
  1087, 1102 - 3) see p. 171. According to the earlier story seen in A the ring
  given to Barahir was made by Feanor, Celegorm's father. In B the later            
  story is present, and the badge of the entwined serpents is that of               
  Felagund's father Finrod (Finarfin in The Silmarillion) who now first             
  appears (other than in a later note to The Children of Hurin, see pp. 80,         
  138. Barahir now first replaces Egnor as Beren's father in A; and by later        
  emendation to B (lines 937, 941) Beor appears, who at this time, as is            
  seen from the prose texts, was Barahir's father. With exceedingly com-            
  plex genealogical and chronological restructuring of the houses of the,           
  Elf-friends in later years Beor came to be removed from Barahir by many           
  generations.                                                                      
                                                                                   
    The name  Tavros given  to Orome  (891, 904)  has occurred  long before           
  in the Gnomish  dictionary, defined  as the  'chief wood-fay,  the Blue           
  Spirit of the Woods' (I. 267, entry Tavari). With his tree-propped halls           
  (892) compare the description of Orome's dwelling in Valmar in the tale           
  of The Coming of the Valar and the Building of Valinor, I.  75 -  6. At           
  line 893 is the first mention of the golden hooves of Orome's horse.              
                                                                                   
                                             V                                      
                                                                                   
                So days drew on from the mournful day;                              
                the curse of silence no more lay                                    
                on Doriath, though Dairon's flute                                   
                and Luthien's singing both were mute.                               
                The murmurs soft awake once more                              1210
                about the woods, the waters roar                                    
                past the great gates of Thingol's halls;                            
                but no dancing step of Luthien falls                                
                on turf or leaf. For she forlorn,                                   
                where stumbled once, where bruised and torn,                  1215

                                              
                                                 
 with longing on him like a dream,                
 had Beren sat by the shrouded stream             
 Esgalduin the dark and strong,                   
 she sat and mourned in a low song:               
 'Endless roll the waters past!              1220
 To this my love hath come at last,               
 enchanted waters pitiless,                       
 a heartache and a loneliness.'                   
                                                 
 The summer turns. In branches tall               
 she hears the pattering raindrops fall,     1225
 the windy tide in leafy seas,                    
 the creaking of the countless trees;             
 and longs unceasing and in vain                  
 to hear one calling once again                   
 the tender name that nightingales           1230
 were called of old. Echo fails.                  
 'Tinuviel! Tinuviel! '                           
 the memory is like a knell,                      
 a faint and far-off tolling bell:                
 'Tinuviel! Tinuviel! '                      1235
                                                 
 '0 mother Melian, tell to me                     
 some part of what thy dark eyes see!             
 Tell of thy magic where his feet                 
 are wandering! What foes him meet?               
 0 mother, tell me, lives he still           1240
 treading the desert and the hill?                
 Do sun and moon above him shine,                 
 do the rains fall on him, mother mine?'          
                                                 
   'Nay, Luthien my child, I fear                 
 he lives indeed in bondage drear.           1245
 The Lord of Wolves hath prisons dark,            
 chains and enchantments cruel and stark,         
 there trapped and bound and languishing          
 now Beren dreams that thou dost sing.'           
                                                 
   'Then I alone must go to him              1250
 and dare the dread in dungeons dim;              
 for none there be that will him aid              
 in all the world, save elven-maid                
 whose only skill were joy and song,              
 and both have failed and left her long.'     1255

   Then nought said Melian thereto,                   
 though wild the words. She wept anew,                
 and ran through the woods like hunted deer           
 with her hair streaming and eyes of fear.            
 Dairon she found with ferny crown               1260
 silently sitting on beech-leaves brown.              
 On the earth she cast her at his side.               
 '0 Dairon, Dairon, my tears,' she cried,             
 'now pity for our old days' sake!                    
 Make me a music for heart's ache,               I 265
 for heart's despair, and for heart's dread,          
 for light gone dark and laughter dead! '             
                                                     
 'But for music dead there is no note,'               
 Dairon answered, and at his throat                   
 his fingers clutched. Yet his pipe he took,     I 270
 and sadly trembling the music shook;                 
 and all things stayed while that piping went         
 wailing in the hollows, and there intent             
 they listened, their business and mirth,             
 their hearts' gladness and the light of earth   1275
 forgotten; and bird-voices failed                    
 while Dairon's flute in Doriath wailed.              
 Luthien wept not for very pain,                      
 and when he ceased she spoke again:                  
 'My friend, I have a need of friends,           1280
 as he who a long dark journey wends,                 
 and fears the road, yet dare not turn                
 and look back where the candles burn                 
 in windows he has left. The night                    
 in front, he doubts to find the light           1285
 that far beyond the hills he seeks.'                 
 And thus of Melian's words she speaks,               
 and of her doom and her desire                      
 to climb the mountains, and the fire                 
 and ruin of the Northern realm                  1290
 to dare, a maiden without helm                       
 or sword, or strength of hardy limb,                 
 where magic founders and grows dim.                  
 His aid she sought to guide her forth                
 and find the pathways to the North,             1295
 if he would not for love of her                      

                                              
                                                  
 go by her side a wanderer.                        
 'Wherefore,' said he, 'should Dairon go           
 into direst peril earth doth know                 
 for the sake of mortal who did steal        1300
 his laughter and joy? No love I feel              
 for Beren son of Barahir,                         
 nor weep for him in dungeons drear,               
 who in this wood have chains enow,                
 heavy and dark. But thee, I vow,            1305
 I will defend from perils fell                    
 and deadly wandering into hell.'                  
                                                  
 No more they spake that day, and she              
 perceived not his meaning. Sorrowfully            
 she thanked him, and she left him there.    1310
 A tree she climbed, till the bright air           
 above the woods her dark hair blew,               
 and straining afar her eyes could view            
 the outline grey and faint and low                
 of dizzy towers where the clouds go,        1315
 the southern faces mounting sheer                 
 in rocky pinnacle and pier                        
 of Shadowy Mountains pale and cold;               
 and wide the lands before them rolled.            
 But straightway Dairon sought the king      1320
 and told him his daughter's pondering,            
 and how her madness might her lead                
 to ruin, unless the king gave heed.               
 Thingol was wroth, and yet amazed;                
 in wonder and half fear he gazed            1325
 on Dairon, and said: 'True hast thou been.        
 Now ever shall love be us between,                
 while Doriath lasts; within this realm            
 thou art a prince of beech and elm! '             
 He sent for Luthien, and said:              1330
 '0 maiden fair, what hath thee led                
 to ponder madness and despair                     
 to wander to ruin, and to fare                    
 from Doriath against my will,                     
 stealing like a wild thing men would kill    1335
 into the emptiness outside?'                      
 'The wisdom, father,'she replied;                

 nor would she promise to forget,                  
 nor would she vow for love or threat              
 her folly to forsake and meek                1340
 in Doriath her father's will to seek.             
 This only vowed she, if go she must,              
 that none but herself would she now trust,        
 no folk of her father's would persuade            
 to break his will or lend her aid;           '345
 if go she must, she would go alone                
 and friendless dare the walls of stone.           
                                                  
 In angry love and half in fear                    
 Thingol took counsel his most dear                
 to guard and keep. He would not bind         1350
 in caverns deep and intertwined                   
 sweet Luthien, his lovely maid,                   
 who robbed of air must wane and fade,             
 who ever must look upon the sky                   
 and see the sun and moon go by.              1355
 But close unto his mounded seat                   
 and grassy throne there ran the feet              
 of Hirilorn, the beechen queen.                   
 Upon her triple boles were seen                   
 no break or branch, until aloft              1360
 in a green glimmer, distant, soft,                
 the mightiest vault of leaf and bough             
 from world's beginning until now                  
 was flung above Esgalduin's shores                
 and the long slopes to Thingol's doors.      1365
 Grey was the rind of pillars tall                 
 and silken-smooth, and far and small              
 to squirrels' eyes were those who went            
 at her grey feet upon the bent.                   
 Now Thingol made men in the beech,           1370
 in that great tree, as far as reach               
 their longest ladders, there to build             
 an airy house; and as he willed                   
 a little dwelling of fair wood                    
 was made, and veiled in leaves it stood      1375
 above the first branches. Corners three           
 it had and windows faint to see,                  
 and by three shafts of Hirilorn                   

 in the corners standing was upborne.              
   There Luthien was bidden dwell,           1380
 until she was wiser and the spell                 
 of madness left her. Up she clomb                 
 the long ladders to her new home                  
 among the leaves, among the birds;                
 she sang no song, she spoke no words.       1385
 White glimmering in the tree she rose,            
 and her little door they heard her close.         
 The ladders were taken and no more                
 her feet might tread Esgalduin's shore.           
                                                  
 Thither at whiles they climbed and brought   1390
 all things she needed or besought;                
 but death was his, whoso should dare              
 a ladder leave, or creeping there                 
 should set one by the tree at night;              
 a guard was held from dusk to light          1395
 about the grey feet of Hirilorn                   
 and Luthien in prison and forlorn.                
 There Dairon grieving often stood                 
 in sorrow for the captive of the wood,            
 and melodies made upon his flute             1400
 leaning against a grey tree-root.                 
 Luthien would from her windows stare              
 and see him far under piping there,               
 and she forgave his betraying word                
 for the music and the grief she heard,       1405
 and only Dairon would she let                     
 across her threshold foot to set.                 
 Yet long the hours when she must sit              
 and see the sunbeams dance and flit               
 in beechen leaves, or watch the stars        1410
 peep on clear nights between the bars             
 of beechen branches. And one night                
 just ere the changing of the light                
 a dream there came, from the Gods, maybe,         
 or Melian's magic. She dreamed that she      1415
 heard Beren's voice o'er hill and fell            
 'Tinuviel' call, 'Tinuviel.'                      
 And her heart answered: 'Let me be gone           
 to seek him no others think upon! '               

 She woke and saw the moonlight pale          1420
 through the slim leaves. It trembled frail       
 upon her arms, as these she spread               
 and there in longing bowed her head,             
 and yearned for freedom and escape.              
                                                 
 Now Luthien doth her counsel shape;          1425
 and Melian's daughter of deep lore               
 knew many things, yea, magics more               
 than then or now know elven-maids                
 that glint and shimmer in the glades.            
 She pondered long, while the moon sank       1430
 and faded, and the starlight shrank,             
 and the dawn opened. At last a smile             
 on her face flickered. She mused a while,        
 and watched the morning sunlight grow,           
 then called to those that walked below.      1435
 And when one climbed to her she prayed           
 that he would in the dark pools wade             
 of cold Esgalduin, water clear,                  
 the clearest water cold and sheer                
 to draw for her. 'At middle night,'          1440
 she said, 'in bowl of'silver white               
 it must be drawn and brought to me               
 with no word spoken, silently.'                  
 Another she begged to bring her wine             
 in a jar of gold where flowers twine -       1445
 'and singing let him come to me                  
 at high noon, singing merrily.'                  
 Again she spake: 'Now go, I pray,                
 to Melian the queen, and say:                    
 "thy daughter many a weary hour              I450
 slow passing watches in her bower;               
 a spinning-wheel she begs thee send."'           
 Then Dairon she called: 'I prithee, friend,      
 climb up and talk to Luthien!'                  
 And sitting at her window then,              1455
 she said: 'My Dairon, thou hast craft,           
 beside thy music, many a shaft                   
 and many a tool of carven wood                   
 to fashion with cunning. It were good,           
 if thou wouldst make a little loom           1460

 to stand in the corner of my room.                  
 My idle fingers would spin and weave                
 a pattern of colours, of morn and eve,              
 of sun and moon and changing light                  
 amid the beech-leaves waving bright.'          1465
 This Dairon did and asked her then:                 
 '0 Luthien, 0 Luthien,                              
 What wilt thou weave? What wilt thou spin? '        
 'A marvellous thread, and wind therein              
 a potent magic, and a spell                    1470
 I will weave within my web that hell                
 nor all the powers of Dread shall break.'           
 Then Dairon wondered, but he spake                  
 no word to Thingol, though his heart                
 feared the dark purpose of her art.            1475
                                                    
 And Luthien now was left alone.                     
 A magic song to Men unknown                         
 she sang, and singing then the wine                 
 with water mingled three times nine;                
 and as in golden jar they lay                  1480
 she sang a song of growth and day;                  
 and as they lay in silver white                     
 another song she sang, of night                     
 and darkness without end, of height                 
 uplifted to the stars, and flight              1485
 and freedom. And all names of things                
 tallest and longest on earth she sings:             
 the locks of the Longbeard dwarves; the tail        
 of Draugluin the werewolf pale;                     
 the body of Glomund the great snake;           1490
 the vast upsoaring peaks that quake                 
 above the fires in Angband's gloom;                 
 the chain Angainor that ere Doom                    
 for Morgoth shall by Gods be wrought                
 of steel and torment. Names she sought,        1495
 and sang of Glend the sword of Nan;                 
 of Gilim the giant of Eruman;                       
 and last and longest named she then                 
 the endless hair of Uinen,                          
 the Lady of the Sea, that lies                 1500
 through all the waters under skies.                 

 Then did she lave her head and sing             
 a theme of sleep and slumbering,                
 profound and fathomless and dark                
 as Luthien's shadowy hair was dark-         1505
 each thread was more slender and more fine      
 than threads of twilight that entwine           
 in filmy web the fading grass                   
 and closing flowers as day doth pass.           
 Now long and longer grew her hair,          1510
 and fell to her feet, and wandered there        
 like pools of shadow on the ground.             
 Then Luthien in a slumber drowned               
 was laid upon her bed and slept,                
 till morning through the windows crept      1515
 thinly and faint. And then she woke,            
 and the room was filled as with a smoke         
 and with an evening mist, and deep              
 she lay thereunder drowsed in sleep.            
 Behold! her hair from windows blew          1520
 in morning airs, and darkly grew                
 waving about the pillars grey                   
 of Hirilorn at break of day.                    
                                                
 Then groping she found her little shears,       
 and cut the hair about her ears,            1525
 and close she cropped it to her head,           
 enchanted tresses, thread by thread.            
 Thereafter grew they slow once more,            
 yet darker than their wont before.              
 And now was her labour but begun:           1530
 long was she spinning, long she spun;           
 and though with elvish skill she wrought,       
 long was her weaving. If men sought             
 to call her, crying from below,                 
 'Nothing I need,' she answered, 'go!        1535
 I would keep my bed, and only sleep             
 I now desire, who waking weep.'                 
                                                
   Then  Dairon  feared,  and  in amaze          
 he called from  under; but  three days          
 she  answered  not.  Of   cloudy  hair      1540
 she wove a web like misty air                   
 of  moonless  night, and  thereof made          

                                                    
                                                      
 a robe as fluttering-dark as shade                    
 beneath great trees, a magic dress                    
 that all was drenched with drowsiness,            1545
 enchanted with a mightier spell                       
 than Melian's raiment in that dell                    
 wherein of yore did Thingol roam                      
 beneath the dark and starry dome                      
 that hung above the dawning world.               1550
 And now this robe she round her furled,               
 and veiled her garments shimmering white;             
 her mantle blue with jewels bright                    
 like crystal stars, the lilies gold,                  
 were wrapped and hid; and down there rolled      1555
 dim dreams and faint oblivious sleep                  
 falling about her, to softly creep                    
 through all the air. Then swift she takes             
 the threads unused; of these she makes                
 a slender rope of twisted strands                1560
 yet long and stout, and with her hands                
 she makes it fast unto the shaft                      
 of Hirilorn. Now, all her craft                       
 and labour ended, looks she forth                     
 from her little window facing North.             1565
                                                      
   Already the sunlight in the trees                   
 is drooping red, and dusk she sees                    
 come softly along the ground below,                   
 and now she murmurs soft and slow.                    
 Now chanting clearer down she cast               1570
 her long hair, till it reached at last                
 from her window to the darkling ground.               
 Men far beneath her heard the sound;                  
 but the slumbrous strand now swung and swayed         
 above her guards. Their talking stayed,            1575
                                                      
 they listened to her voice and fell                   
 suddenly beneath a binding spell.                     
                                                      
   Now  clad  as  in  a  cloud   she  hung;            
 now   down  her   roped  hair   she  swung            
 as light as squirrel, and away,                  1580
 away,  she  danced,  and  who   could  say            
 what  paths  she  took, whose  elvish feet            
 no impress made a-dancing fleet?                      
                                                      
                     *                                 

                              NOTES.                                        
                                                                           
 1222 - 3.   At lines 651 - 2 these lines were transposed on C. S. Lewis's
             suggestion (see p. 323); and heartache was emended to          
             hunger.                                                        
      1226.  Cf. line 664.                                                  
      1231.  Original reading of B: are called in elfland. Echo fails. The
             change was probably simply to get rid of 'elfland'.            
      1249.  now: uncertain (original reading doth Beren dream              
             emended to ?now Beren dreams).                                  
      1253.  Throughout this Canto elven- and elvish are emendations        
             of elfin made on the B-text.                                   
 1260 - 1.   Cf. lines 497 - 8.                                             
 1308 - 10.  Marked revise on the B-text.                                   
    1312.    her dark hair: so also in A. See note to line 558.             
  1316-17.   Cf. lines 389 - 90. The Shadowy Mountains (1318) are the       
             Mountains of Terror (Ered Gorgoroth): see pp. 170-1.          
      1323.  This line is marked with an X on the B-text.                   
      1329.  As line 1323.                                                  
      1358.  Against Hirilorn in A is written Hiradorn, and so also at      
             lines 1396, 1523. At line 1563 Hiradorn is the form in the     
             text of A.                                                     
  1362-3.    Cf. lines 872-3.                                               
    1370.    men > them A. At 1390, where B has they, A had men >           
             they; at 1533, 1573 men was not changed in either text.        
  1414-17.   Marked with a line on the B-text; in the margin some new       
             verses are written, but so faint and rapid as to be quite      
             illegible.                                                     
      1488.  locks B] beards A                                              
      1489.  A: of Carcharas the wolf-ward pale;                            
             In the original draft the spelling is Carcaras as in the type-
             script version of the Tale of Tinuviel (manuscript version     
             Karkaras). In the second version of The Children of Hurin      
             (p. 107 line 374.) the form is Carcharoth (emended from         
             Carcharolch) .                                                 
      1490.  Glomund B] Glorund A (as in the Last Tales, but there          
             always without accent).                                        
      1493.  Angainor A, B] Engainor in the original draft.                 
      1496.  Nan B] Nann A (but Nan in the original draft).                 
 1549-50.    Cf. lines 406- 7.                                              
    1563.    Hirilorn B] Hiradorn A. See note to line 1358.                 
                                                                           
                            Commentary on Canto V.                          
                                                                           
  The plot-outline 'Synopsis I' covering the narrative of this Canto is very
  slight:                                                                   

  Mourning of Tinuviel.                                                            
  Treachery of Dairon.                                                             
  Building of the Tree House in Hirilorn.                                          
  Escape of Tinuviel.                                                              
  [Added in: Repentance, wandering, and loss of Dairon.]                           
                                                                                  
  The wandering and loss of Dairon goes back to the Tale of Tinuviel               
 (II.  20  -  1)  and  survived into  The Silmarillion  (p. 183),  but there  is no
 :-  other  mention  of his  'repentance' (though  this is  perhaps implied  in the
 : Lay, lines 1398ff.)                                                             
  In  my  commentary  on  the  passage   in  the   Tale  of   Tinuviel  correspond-
 ing to this Canto I remarked (II. 54) that                                       
                                                                                  
  the  story  of  her  imprisonment  in  the  house  in  Hirilorn  and   her  escape
  from   it  never   underwent  any   significant  change.   The  passage   in  The
  Silmarillion (p. 172) is indeed  very brief,  but its  lack of  detail is  due to
  compression  rather   than  to   omission  based   on  dissatisfaction;   the  Lay
  of  Leithian,  from  which  the  prose  account   in  The   Silmarillion  directly
  derives,  is  in  this  passage so  close, in  point of  narrative detail,  to the
  Tale of Tinuviel as to be almost identical with it.                              
                                                                                  
 :, There is little to add to this here. In one respect the narrative of the Lay is
 at  variance  with the  story told  in The  Silmarillion. What  was 'the  curse of
 silence'  (1207)?  It  was  due  to  Dairon  (848 -  53).  In a  preliminary, soon
 abandoned  draft  for  the  'Silmarillion'  version,  where  the  story was  to be
 told  far  more  amply  (by  following  the  Lay  more  closely)  the   matter  is
 : made more explicit:                                                             
                                                                                  
  But   Dairon   haunted   the   trees   and   watched  them   from  afar;   and  he
  cried  aloud  in  the  bitterness  of  his  heart:  'Hateful  is  now  become  the
  land  that  I  loved,  and  the  trees  misshapen.  No   more  shall   music  here
  be  heard.  Let  all  voices  fail  in  Doriath,  and  in  every  dale   and  upon
  every  hill  let  the  trees stand  silent! '  And there  was a  hush and  a great
  stillness;  and  Thingol's  folk  were   filled  with   wonder.  And   they  spoke
  to their king, asking what was the reason of the silence.                        
                                                                                  
 :  Dairon's  'curse'  was  lifted  after  Beren's  departure, although  Luthien no
 :. longer sang and Dairon no longer piped. This is in contrast to ?he             
 Silmarillion (p. 168), where after Beren went                                     
                                                                                  
  Luthien was silent, and from that hour she sang not again in Doriath.            
  A brooding silence fell upon the woods.                                          
                                                                                  
  For  the  names  in  the  'lengthening  spell'  see II.  67 -  8. A  new element
 among  the  'longest  things'  is  introduced  in  the  version  in the  Lay, the
 peaks  above   Angband  (1491   -  2);   and  in   B  the   name  of   the  great
 Dragon   becomes   Glomund.   The   chain   with   which   Morgoth   was   bound,
 Angaino/Angainu   in   the   Last   Tales,   becomes   Angainor;   but    it   is
 curious  that  in  the  Lay  it  is  only  spoken  of  as  a  punishment awaiting

  Morgoth in the future  (ere Doom,  1493), whereas  in the  old story  of The
  Chaining  of  Melko  (I.  104) it  was the  shackle with  which he  was taken
  prisoner in the original war that led to his captivity  in Valinor,  and this
  survived in The Silmarillion (p. 51): at the end of the  Elder Days  'he was
  bound  with  the  chain  Angainor  which  he   had  worn   aforetime'  (ibid.
                                                                              
  P- 252).                                                                     
    New  elements  in  the  story  that  have  yet  to  appear  in  the  actual
  narrative  of the  Lay are  seen in  Draugluin, replacing  in B  Carcharas of
  A in the  'lengthening spell'  (thus Carcharas  is no  longer the  'father of
  wolves',  see II.  68), and  in Melian's  reference to  Beren's lying  in the
  dungeons of the Lord of Wolves (1246).                                       
                                                                              
    Luthien's  dream  in  which  she  heard  Beren's  voice  far  off  is still
  ascribed, as it was in the Tale,  to the  Gods, if  less positively  (a dream
  there   came,   from   the   Gods,   maybe, /or  Melian's   magic,  1414-15);
  see  II.  19,  68.  But  the  passage  is  marked  in  B,  perhaps indicating
  dissatisfaction with the idea.                                               
                                                                              
    There  is  curious  detail  in  a  marginal  note  to  the B-text.  At some
  time  (as  I  think)  long  afterwards  someone  unknown wrote  against lines
  133  I-6:  'Thingol is  here being  rather obtuse',  and against  this remark
  my  father scribbled:  'But he  could not  believe she  loved Beren  - unless
  some evil spell had somehow been laid on her.'                               
                                                                              
                                         VI.                                   
                                                                              
                 When Morgoth in that day of doom                              
                 had slain the Trees and filled with gloom                1585
                 the shining land of Valinor,                                  
                 there Feanor and his sons then swore                          
                 the mighty oath upon the hill                                 
                 of tower-crowned Tun, that still                              
                 wrought wars and sorrow in the world.                    1590
                 From darkling seas the fogs unfurled                          
                 their blinding shadows grey and cold                          
                 where Glingal once had bloomed with gold                      
                 and Belthil bore its silver flowers.                          
                 The mists were mantled round the towers                  1595
                 of the Elves' white city by the sea.                          
                 There countless torches fitfully                              
                 did start and twinkle, as the Gnomes                          
                 were gathered to their fading homes,                          

 and thronged the long and winding stair    1600
 that led to the wide echoing square.           
                                               
 There Feanor mourned his jewels divine,        
 the Silmarils he made. Like wine               
 his wild and potent words them fill;           
 a great host harkens deathly still.        1605
 But all he said both wild and wise,            
 half truth and half the fruit of lies          
 that Morgoth sowed in Valinor,                 
 in other songs and other lore                  
 recorded is. He bade them flee             1610
 from lands divine, to cross the sea,           
 the pathless plains, the perilous shores       
 where ice-infested water roars;                
 to follow Morgoth to the unlit earth           
 leaving their dwellings and olden mirth;   1615
 to go back to the Outer Lands                  
 to wars and weeping. There their hands         
 they joined in vows, those kinsmen seven,      
 swearing beneath the stars of Heaven,          
 by Varda the Holy that them wrought        1620
 and bore them each with radiance fraught       
 and set them in the deeps to flame.            
 Timbrenting's holy height they name,           
 whereon are built the timeless halls           
 of Manwe Lord of Gods. Who calls           1625
 these names in witness may not break           
 his oath, though earth and heaven shake.       
                                               
   Curufin, Celegorm the fair,                  
 Damrod and Diriel were there,                  
 and Cranthir dark, and Maidros tall        1630
 (whom after torment should befall),            
 and Maglor the mighty who like the sea         
 with deep voice sings yet mournfully.          
 'Be he friend or foe, or seed defiled          
 of Morgoth Bauglir, or mortal child        1635
 that in after days on earth shall dwell,       
 no law, nor love, nor league of hell,          
 not might of Gods, not moveless fate           
 shall him defend from wrath and hate           
 of Feanor's sons, who takes or steals      1640

 or finding keeps the Silmarils,                   
 the thrice-enchanted globes of light             
 that shine until the final night.'               
                                                 
 The wars and wandering of the Gnomes             
 this tale tells not. Far from their homes   1645
 they fought and laboured in the North.           
 Fingon daring alone went forth                   
 and sought for Maidros where he hung;            
 in torment terrible he swung,                    
 his wrist in band of forged steel,            1650
 from a sheer precipice where reel                
 the dizzy senses staring down                    
 from Thangorodrim's stony crown.                 
 The song of Fingon Elves yet sing,               
 captain of armies, Gnomish king,            1655
 who fell at last in flame of swords              
 with his white banners and his lords.            
 They sing how Maidros free he set,               
 and stayed the feud that slumbered yet           
 between the children proud of Finn.         1660
 Now joined once more they hemmed him in,         
 even great Morgoth, and their host               
 beleaguered Angband, till they boast             
 no Orc nor demon ever dare                       
 their leaguer break or past them fare.      1665
 Then days of solace woke on earth                
 beneath the new-lit Sun, and mirth               
 was heard in the Great Lands where Men,          
 a young race, spread and wandered then.          
 That was the time that songs do call        1670
 the Siege of Angband, when like a wall           
 the Gnomish swords did fence the earth           
 from Morgoth's ruin, a time of birth,            
 of blossoming, of flowers, of growth;            
 but still there held the deathless oath,    1675
 and still the Silmarils were deep                
 in Angband's darkly-dolven keep.                 
                                                 
 An end there came, when fortune turned,          
 and flames of Morgoth's vengeance burned,        
 and all the might which he prepared         1680
 in secret in his fastness flared                 

 and poured across the Thirsty Plain;             
 and armies black were in his train.              
 The leaguer of Angband Morgoth broke;            
 his enemies in fire and smoke                1685
 were scattered, and the Orcs there slew          
 and slew, until the blood like dew               
 dripped from each cruel and crooked blade.       
 Then Barahir the bold did aid                    
 with mighty spear, with shield and men,      1690
 Felagund wounded. To the fen                     
 escaping, there they bound their troth,          
 and Felagund deeply swore an oath                
 of friendship to his kin and seed,               
 of love and succour in time of need.         1695
 But there of Finrod's children four              
 were Angrod slain and proud Egnor.               
 Felagund and Orodreth then                       
 gathered the remnant of their men,               
 their maidens and their children fair;       1700
 forsaking war they made their lair               
 and cavernous hold far in the south.             
 On Narog's towering bank its mouth               
 was opened; which they hid and veiled,           
 and mighty doors, that unassailed            1705
 till Turin's day stood vast and grim,            
 they built by trees o'ershadowed dim.            
 And with them dwelt a long time there            
 Curufin, and Celegorm the fair;                  
 and a mighty folk grew neath their hands     1710
 in Narog's secret halls and lands.               
                                                 
   Thus Felagund in Nargothrond                   
 still reigned, a hidden king whose bond          
 was sworn to Barahir the bold.                   
 And now his son through forests cold         1715
 wandered alone as in a dream.                    
 Esgalduin's dark and shrouded stream             
 he followed, till its waters frore               
 were joined to Sirion, Sirion hoar,              
 pale silver water wide and free              1720
 rolling in splendour to the sea.                 
   Now Beren came unto the pools,                 

 wide shallow meres where Sirion cools            
 his gathered tide beneath the stars,             
 ere chafed and sundered by the bars         1725
 of reedy banks a mighty fen                      
 he feeds and drenches, plunging then             
 into vast chasms underground,                    
 where many miles his way is wound.               
 Umboth-Muilin, Twilight Meres,              1730
 those great wide waters grey as tears            
 the Elves then named. Through driving rain       
 from thence across the Guarded Plain             
 the Hills of the Hunters Beren saw               
 with bare tops bitten bleak and raw         1735
 by western winds; but in the mist                
 of streaming rains that flashed and hissed       
 into the meres he knew there lay                 
 beneath those hills the cloven way               
 of Narog, and the watchful halls            1740
 of Felagund beside the falls                     
 of Ingwil tumbling from the wold.                
 An everlasting watch they hold,                  
 the Gnomes of Nargothrond renowned,              
 and every hill is tower-crowned,            1745
 where wardens sleepless peer and gaze            
 guarding the plain and all the ways              
 between Narog swift and Sirion pale;             
 and archers whose arrows never fail              
 there range the woods, and secret kill      1750
 all who creep thither against their will.        
 Yet now he thrusts into that land                
 bearing the gleaming ring on hand                
 of Felagund, and oft doth cry:                   
 'Here comes no wandering Orc or spy,        1755
 but Beren son of Barahir                         
 who once to Felagund was dear.'                  
 So ere he reached the eastward shore             
 of Narog, that doth foam and roar                
 o'er boulders black, those archers green    1760
 came round him. When the ring was seen           
 they bowed before him, though his plight         
 was poor and beggarly. Then by night             
 they led him northward, for no ford              

 nor bridge was built where Narog poured           1765
 before the gates of Nargothrond,                      
 and friend nor foe might pass beyond.                 
 To northward, where that stream yet young             
 more slender flowed, below the tongue                 
 of foam-splashed land that Ginglith pens          1770
 when her brief golden torrent ends                    
 and joins the Narog, there they wade.                 
 Now swiftest journey thence they made                 
 to Nargothrond's sheer terraces                       
 and dim gigantic palaces.                         1775
 They came beneath a sickle moon                       
 to doors there darkly hung and hewn                   
 with posts and lintels of ponderous stone             
 and timbers huge. Now open thrown                     
 were gaping gates, and in they strode             1780
 where Felagund on throne abode.                       
                                                      
 Fair were the words of Narog's king                   
 to Beren, and his wandering                           
 and all his feuds and bitter wars                     
 recounted soon. Behind closed doors               1785
 they sat, while Beren told his tale                   
 of Doriath; and words him fail                        
 recalling Luthien dancing fair                        
 with wild white roses in her hair,                    
 remembering her elven voice that rung             1790
 while stars in twilight round her hung.               
 He spake of Thingol's marvellous halls                
 by enchantment lit, where fountain falls              
 and ever the nightingale doth sing                    
 to Melian and to her king.                        1795
 The quest he told that Thingol laid                   
 in scorn on him; how for love of maid                 
 more fair than ever was born to Men,                  
 of Tinuviel, of Luthien,                              
 he must essay the burning waste,                  1800
 and doubtless death and torment taste.                
                                                      
  This  Felagund  in  wonder heard,                    
 and heavily spake at last this word:                  
 'It seems that Thingol doth desire                    
 thy death. The everlasting fire                   1805

 of those enchanted jewels all know            
 is cursed with an oath of endless woe,        
 and Feanor's sons alone by right              
 are lords and masters of their light.         
 He cannot hope within his hoard           1810
 to keep this gem, nor is he lord              
 of all the folk of Elfinesse.                 
 And yet thou saist for nothing less           
 can thy return to Doriath                     
 be purchased? Many a dreadful path        1815
 in sooth there lies before thy feet -         
 and after Morgoth, still a fleet              
 untiring hate, as I know well,                
 would hunt thee from heaven unto hell.        
 Feanor's sons would, if they could,       1820
 slay thee or ever thou reached his wood       
 or laid in Thingol's lap that fire,           
 or gained at least thy sweet desire.          
 Lo! Celegorm and Curufin                      
 here dwell this very realm within,        1825
 and even though I, Finrod's son,              
 am king, a mighty power have won              
 and many of their own folk lead.              
 Friendship to me in every need                
 they yet have shown, but much I fear      1830
 that to Beren son of Barahir                  
 mercy or love they will not show              
 if once thy dreadful quest they know.'        
                                              
 True words he spake. For when the king        
 to all his people told this thing,        1835
 and spake of the oath to Barahir,             
 and how that mortal shield and spear          
 had saved them from Morgoth and from woe      
 on Northern battlefields long ago,            
 then many were kindled in their hearts    1840
 once more to battle. But up there starts      
 amid the throng, and loudly cries             
 for hearing, one with flaming eyes,           
 proud Celegorm with gleaming hair             
 and shining sword. Then all men stare     1845
 upon his stern unyielding face,               

 and a great hush falls upon that place.       
                                              
   'Be he friend or foe, or demon wild         
 of Morgoth, Elf, or mortal child,             
 or any that here on earth may dwell,      1850
 no law, nor love, nor league of hell,         
 no might of Gods, no binding spell,           
 shall him defend from hatred fell             
 of Feanor's sons, whoso take or steal         
 or finding keep a Silmaril.               1855
 These we alone do claim by right,             
 our thrice enchanted jewels bright.'          
                                              
 Many wild and potent words he spoke,          
 and as before in Tun awoke                    
 his father's voice their hearts to fire,  1860
 so now dark fear and brooding ire             
 he cast on them, foreboding war               
 of friend with friend; and pools of gore      
 their minds imagined lying red                
 in Nargothrond about the dead,            1865
 did Narog's host with Beren go;               
 or haply battle, ruin, and woe                
 in Doriath where great Thingol reigned,       
 if Feanor's fatal jewel he gained.            
 And even such as were most true           1870
 to Felagund his oath did rue,                 
 and thought with terror and despair           
 of seeking Morgoth in his lair                
 with force or guile. This Curufin             
 when his brother ceased did then begin    1875
 more to impress upon their minds;             
 and such a spell he on them binds             
 that never again till Turin's day             
 would Gnome of Narog in array                 
 of open battle go to war.                 1880
 With secrecy, ambush, spies, and lore         
 of wizardry, with silent leaguer              
 of wild things wary, watchful, eager,         
 of phantom hunters, venomed darts,            
 and unseen stealthy creeping arts,        1885
 with padding hatred that its prey             
 with feet of velvet all the day               

 followed remorseless out of sight              
 and slew it unawares at night -                
 thus they defended Nargothrond,            1890
 and forgot their kin and solemn bond           
 for dread of Morgoth that the art              
 of Curufin set within their heart.             
                                               
 So would they not that angry day               
 King Felagund their lord obey,             1895
 but sullen murmured that Finrod                
 nor yet his son were as a god.                 
 Then Felagund took off his crown               
 and at his feet he cast it down,               
 the silver helm of Nargothrond:            1900
 'Yours ye may break, but I my bond             
 must keep, and kingdom here forsake.           
 If hearts here were that did not quake,        
 or that to Finrod's son were true,             
 then I at least should find a few          1905
 to go with me, not like a poor                 
 rejected beggar scorn endure,                  
 turned from my gates to leave my town,         
 my people, and my realm and crown! '           
                                               
 Hearing these words there swiftly stood    1910
 beside him ten tried warriors good,            
 men of his house who had ever fought           
 wherever his banners had been brought.         
 One stooped and lifted up his crown,           
 and said: '0 king, to leave this town      1915
 is now our fate, but not to lose               
 thy rightful lordship. Thou shalt choose       
 one to be steward in thy stead.'               
 Then Felagund upon the head                    
 of Orodreth set it: 'Brother mine,         1920
 till I return this crown is thine.'            
 Then Celegorm no more would stay,              
 and Curufin smiled and turned away.            
                                               
                     *                          

                                          
                                                                                      
                             NOTES.                                                    
                                                                                      
  1593 - 4.   Original readings of B Glingol, Bansil, as at line 1141.                
  1598 - 9.   Couplet marked for revision, partly on account of did start,             
              partly on account of Gnomes. I do not record further in-                 
              stances of this sort, which occur casually throughout.                   
     1619.    Here is written on the B-text: 'A see the Qenta.' This is the            
              'Silmarillion' version of 1930, and presumably refers to the             
              form of the Oath as it appears there.                                    
     1620.    Varda the Holy is written in the margin of the B-text, which             
              like A has Bridhil the Blessed. Bridhil occurs.earlier in A              
              (note to lines 377 - 81), where B has a different reading.              
  1632-3.     Cf. lines 506 - 9.                                                       
    1647.     Finweg A, and B as typed, early emended in B to Fingon.                 
     1654.    As line 1647.                                                            
     1656.    Cf. The Children of Hurin, first version line 1975, second               
              version line 19, from which the words (referring to                      
              Finweg/Fingon) fell in flame of swords are derived; in the                
              second version occur also the king's white banners.                      
 1710 - 11.   A: a great people were gathered of the Gnomes                            
                 in these new-builded secret homes.                                    
     1736.    Against the words by western winds is written (in such a               
              way as to show that this was the point reached, not the                  
              starting-point) the date '29 Mar. 1928', the previous date               
              being 27 - 28 March 1928 at line 1161.                                  
     1859.    Tun B] Cor A                                                             
     1867.    A: if Felagund should with Beren go;                                     
     1891.    A: and forgot their blood and kinship's bond                             
     1900.    helm is an emendation in B for crown.                                    
     1920.    An X is written against this line, probably long after when              
              Orodreth was moved from his place as Felagund's brother                  
              (see p. 91).                                                             
     1921.    crown B] realm A                                                         
                                                                                      
                       Commentary on Canto VI.                                         
                                                                                      
 The plot-outline 'Synopsis I' continues thus:                                        
                                                                                      
  Beren goes to Celegorm, who disguises him [struck out: and gives                     
  him a magic knife. Beren and his Gnomish guides* are captured by                     
  Orcs: and a few survivors taken before (Melko >)  Morgoth. Beren                     
  tells M. he is a 'trapper of the woods'.]                                            
                                                                                      
  (* This phrase was changed to: 'Beren gets lost and separated from his Gnomish guides';
 and was then struck out with the rest of the passage.)                                 

    They  go  and  seek  to  break  into  Angband  disguised  as Orcs,  but are
  captured  [struck  out:  and  set  in chains,  and killed  one by  one. Beren
  lies  wondering  which will  be his  turn.] by  the Lord  of Wolves,  and set
  in bonds, and devoured one by one.                                            
                                                                               
  It is interesting here  to see  how the  relevant features  of the  story are
 treated in the 'Sketch of the Mythology'  of 1926,  as originally  written. In
 this  account  Beren's  father  is  Barahir,  and  he  'had  been a  friend of
 Celegorm  of  Nargothrond'.  After  Thingol's  demand  that  Beren  get  him a
 Silmaril:                                                                      
                                                                               
  Beren  sets  out  to  achieve  this,  is  captured,  and  set  in  dungeon in
  Angband, but  conceals his  real identity,  and is  given as  a slave  to Thu
  the hunter.                                                                   
                                                                               
  This passage is evidently  earlier than  'Synopsis I'  (at the  earliest, the
 end of May 1926, the date of the latest of the three invoices  on which  it is
 written),  since  the  'Sketch'  contains  no  reference  to  Celegorm's  aid,
 Beren's  companions,  their  disguising  as  Orcs,  and  their capture  by the
 Lord  of  Wolves. On  the contrary,  Beren goes  to Angband  alone just  as he
 did  in  the Tale  of Tinuviel,  and -  most notably  - is  given to  'Thu the
 hunter' as a slave, just as  in the  Tale he  was given  to Tevildo  Prince of
 Cats as a slave. In Synopsis I we see, I think,  the very  point at  which the
 story  of  Beren's  Gnomish  companions  came  into  being, of  their disguise
 as  Orcs,  and of  their deaths  one by  one in  the dungeons  of the  Lord of
 Wolves.  (Thu  appears  first  in  the  fragment  of  the  Lay  of   the  Fall
 of  Gondolin  (p.  146),   and  in   The  Children   of  Hurin   as  Morgoth's
 most mighty thane: first version line 391, second version line 763).            
  But  already  at  lines  296ff.  in  the  A-text  of   the  Lay   of Leithian
 (summer 1925) there is a reference  to the  'deed of  service' done  by Egnor
 Beren's father to Celegorm, and the gift of the ring:  while in  the 'Sketch'
 Barahir 'had been a friend of Celegorm of Nargothrond'. Thus:                  
                                                                               
 Lay of Leithian. Egnor Beren's father performed a service for Celegorm,             
 Canto II.                   from whom he received a ring.                 
 (summer 1925).                                                                 
                                                                               
 Sketch of the. Barahir Beren's father was a friend of Celegorm of               
  Mythology.  Nargothrond.                                                        
 (early in 1926,                                                                
                        Beren sets out alone and is captured and imprisoned     
  see p. 3)                                                                     
                       in Angband, but is given as a slave to Thu the hunter.
                                                                               
 Synopsis I.                  Beren goes to Celegorm who aids him (story of the
 (after May 1926) Gnomish companions appears).                                  
                                                                               
  The  rather   surprising  conclusion   must  be   that  the   association  of
 Egnor/Barahir  with  Celegorm  and  the   gift  of   the  ring   preceded  the
 emergence of the story of Beren's going to Celegorm for aid.                   
  In the rejected  part of  Synopsis I  here we  see a  last survival  from the

                    
                                                                                             
 Tale of  Tinuviel: Beren  tells Morgoth  that he  is a  trapper of  the woods;               
 cf. the Tale (II. 15): Beren said therewith that  he was  a great  trapper of               
 small animals and a  snarer of  birds' -  and it  was indeed  this explanation               
 of  Beren's  to  Melko  that  got  him  his  post  in Tevildo's  kitchens. The               
 mention  in  this  rejected  passage  of  a  magic  knife  given  to  Beren by               
 Celegorm  was  clearly  a passing  idea to  account for  the knife  with which               
 Beren  would  cut  the  Silmaril  from  the  Iron  Crown,  since  the kitchen-               
 knife  with  which  he did  the deed  in the  Tale (II.  33) had  been abandoned               
 with the kitchens.                                                                           
  Other  loose  papers  in  addition to  Synopsis I  show the  further develop-               
 ment of the narrative. The first of these I will refer to as 'Synposis II', it               
 begins with the beginning of Canto VI and I  cite it  here as  far as  the end               
 of the Canto.                                                                                
                                                                                             
  Beren comes to Felagund at  Nargothrond; who  receives him  well, but                       
  warns him of the oath of  the sons  of Feanor,  and that  Curufin and                       
  Celegorm dwelling with him have great power in his realm.                                   
     Curufin and Celegorm learn of Beren's purpose, and recalling their                       
  oath forbid the Gnomes to aid Beren to get the Silmaril  for Thingol.                       
  The Gnomes fearing war in  Nargothrond, or  war against  Thingol, and                       
  in [any] case despairing utterly of reaching the depths of Angband by                       
  force or guile will not support Felagund. Felagund mindful of his own                       
  oath hands his kingdom over to Orodreth, and with only his own faith-                       
  ful followers of his household (ten in number) goes forth with Beren.                       
                                                                                             
  In  the  Lay  of Leithian  the 'Nargothrond  Element' in  the story  had by                 
 this time (the  spring of  1928) evolved  further (see  p. 171).'  The major                 
 figure  of  (Felagoth  >)  Felagund, son  of Finwe's  third son  Finrod, had                 
 emerged (see p. 91), and  by Canto  VI was  present also  in the  A-text; it                 
 was he, not Celegorm, who was  rescued in  the battle  that ended  the Siege                 
 of  Angband  and  who then  went south  with his  brother Orodreth  to found                 
 Nargothrond,  and  Celegorm  with  his  brother  Curufin  have  been shifted                 
 by  the  movement of  the legend  into the  role of  Felagund's overpowerful                 
 'guests' (it is not made explicit in the Lay why they were there,  though it                 
 could be guessed that they also had fled from 'the Northern battlefields').                 
 In the passage from Synopsis II just given  my father  is seen  working out                 
 the narrative from this point and on this narrative basis,  and many  of the                 
 motives that are important in the final  version now  appear: on  account of                 
 their oath Celegorm and Curufin are the cause  of the  refusal of  the Elves                 
 of  Nargothrond  to  support  Felagund  in  the  aiding  of  Beren; Felagund                 
 gives the crown to Orodreth; and only ten of Felagund's people go with                    
 him." I think it certain that Synopsis II was written as, and did  in fact                    
 provide, the outline narrative for this and the following Cantos.                            
                                                                                             
 (* An intermediate stage is seen in a rewritten passage of the 1926 'Sketch of the Mythology',
 to  be  given in  Vol. IV,  where Celegorm  has already  been displaced  by Felagoth  (not yet
 Felagund)  but  where  Celegorm  only learns  the errand  of Felagoth  and Beren  after their
 departure from Nargothrond, and they leave with a large force.)                              

    In Canto VI we  meet for  the first  time several  central features  of the
  earlier  history  of  the  Gnomes in  Beleriand and  the North,  though these
  are not necessarily  their first  occurrences in  my father's  writings. Thus
  the  story  of  the  rescue  of  Maidros  by  (Finweg  >)  Fingon   from  his
  torment  on  Thangorodrim,  where  he  was  hanged  by  his  right  hand,  is
  almost certainly implied in The  Children of  Hurin, where  it is  said that
  Maidros wielded his sword with his left (see p. 86); and it is fully  told in
  the 'Sketch' as first written early in 1926, some two  years before  the date
  of the present Canto (see note to line 1736). Here  also are  references to
  the  long  years  of  the  Siege  of Angband  after the  healing of  the feud
  among  the  Gnomish  princes  (the  cause  of  which  we  do  not  yet know);
  and  to  the  bursting  of  Morgoth's  armies  black  (cf.  The Silmarillion
  p. 151: the black armies of the Orcs') across the Thirsty Plain  (for which
  see p. 55). Here we meet for the first  time (apart  from a  later note  to The
  Children  of  Hurin,  p.   So)  Angrod   and  Egnor,   sons  of   Finrod  and
  brothers  of  Felagund and  Orodreth, who  meet their  deaths in  the battle;
  and here  it is  said that  Felagund was  wounded (line  1691), and  that his
  rescuers withdrew 'to the fen'  - very  probably the  'mighty fen'  of Sirion
  referred to at line 1726.                                                   
    For  Finweg  >  Fingon,  and  Finn  (line  1660)  =  Finwe,  see   p. 137-8.
  The  genealogy  of  the  princes  of  the  Gnomes  as it  had emerged  in the
  1920s is now complete:                                                     
                                                                             
                          Finwe/Finn.                                         
                                                                             
  Feanor.                 Fingolfin.                    Finrod.               
                                                                             
  Seven. (Finweg >). Turgon. Isfin. Felagund. Angrod. Egnor. Orodreth.                
  sons.    Fingon.                                                            
                                                                             
    The earliest version of the Feanorian Oath is  found in  alliterative verse
  in  The  Flight  of  the  Noldoli (see  pp. 135-6),  and that  in the  Lay of
  Leithian (lines 1634  - 43)  follows it  quite closely  despite its  being in
  rhyming  couplets,  with  many of  the same  phrases. Further  variations are
  introduced  in  Celegorm's  version  (lines  1848 -  57).  On  the  name Tim-
  brenting  of Taniquetil  (taken in  witness of  the Oath)  see pp.  127, 139.
                                                                             
    Most  of  the geographical  references and  names in  this Canto  are amply
  explained by Part III 'Failivrin'  of The  Children of  Hurin. For  the Hills
  of  the-Hunters,  the  rivers  Ginglith  and  Ingwil,  and the  Guarded Plain
  see  pp.  88-g.  It  is  now  made  clear  that  Umboth-Muilin,  the Twilight
  Meres,  were  north  of  Sirion's  fall  and  passage  underground  (to which
  there is a reference in The  Children of  Hurin, line  1467), whereas  in the

                                                                               
                                                                                  
   Lost Tales the reverse was the case (see II. 217);  and also  that Esgalduin
   was  a  tributary  of  Sirion  (lines  1717  -  20).  In the  verses describing
   Nargothrond  the  Lay  of  Leithian  looks  back  to  and echoes  The Children
   of Hurin; compare                                                               
                                                                                  
                   Doors there darkly dim gigantic                                 
                   were  hewn  in  the  hillside;  huge  their timbers             
                   and  their  posts  and  lintels of  ponderous stone             
                                                                 (p. 68, 1828 - 30)
                                                                                  
 ':- with                                                                          
                                                                                  
                     Nargothrond's sheer terraces                                  
                   and dim gigantic palaces                              (1774-5)
                                                                                  
   and                                                                             
                                                                                  
                   doors there darkly hung and hewn                                
                   with posts and lintels of ponderous stone                       
                   and timbers huge.                                     (1777-9)
                                                                                  
 I  have  mentioned  earlier  (pp.  88, go)  the drawing  and watercolour  of the
 entrance   to   Nargothrond.   The   drawing  is   inscribed  'Lyme   1928'  (a
 summer  holiday   at  Lyme   Regis  in   Dorset)  and   the  watercolour   was  very
 likely  done  at  the  same  time:  thus  a few  months after  the writing  of Canto
 VI  of  the  Lay  of Leithian.  In  both  are  seen  the bare  Hills of  the Hunters
 beyond   (with   bare   tops   bitten   bleak   and   raw,   1735),   and   in  the
 watercolour   Nargothrond's    sheer   terraces    (1774);   but    neither   picture
 suggests   that   the  entrance   was  hid   and  veiled   (1704),  by   trees  o'er-
 shadowed  dim  (1707)  -  a  feature  of  the  description  that  goes  back  to the
 Tale  of   Turambar   ('the  doors   of  the   caves...  were   cunningly  concealed
 by trees', II. 81).                                                               
      I  noticed  in   my  commentary   on  the   Tale  of   Turambar  (II.  124  and
 footnote)  that  'the  policy  of  secrecy  and  refusal  of  open  war  pursued  by
 the  Elves  of  Nargothrond  was  always  an  essential  element',  but   that  from
 The Silmarillion   p.  168   'it  seems   that  when   Beren  came   to  Nargothrond
 the   "secret"   policy   was   already  pursued   under  Felagund',   whereas  from
 p.  170  'it  seems  that  it  came  into  being  from   the  potent   rhetoric  of
 Curufin after  Beren   went  there'.   Prom  this   Canto  it   is  seen   that  this
 contradiction,  if  contradiction  it  is,  has  its  source  in  the  two  passages
 lines 1743 - 51 and 1877-93.                                                      
      In  this  latter  passage  there  are again  strong echoes  of The  Children of
 Hurin; compare                                                                    
                                                                                  
                                            a leaguer silent                       
                    unseen, stealthy, beset the stranger,                          
                    as of wild things wary that watch moveless,                    
                    then follow fleetly with feet of velvet                        
                    their heedless prey with padding hatred (p. 66, 1749 - 53)     

                                                                         
                                                                              
  with                                                                         
                         with silent leaguer                                   
           of wild things wary, watchful, eager,                               
           of phantom hunters, venomed darts,                                  
           and unseen stealthy creeping arts,                                  
           with padding hatred that its prey                                   
           with feet of velvet all the day                                     
           followed remorseless...                                 (1882 - 8)
                                                                              
    There  remain  a  couple  of  points  concerning  names.  The  Great  Lands
 are still so called (1668); but at 1616 the expression 'Outer  Lands' occurs.
 This was used in The Cottage of Lost  Play as  first written  in the  sense of
 the  Great  Lands,  but  was  subsequently  applied  to  the lands  beyond the
 Western Sea (see I.  ax, 81  - 2).  'Outer Lands'  = Middle-earth  is frequent
 in The Silmarillion.                                                          
    The name of the river,  Narog, is  used, as  often later,  to refer  to the
 realm  of  Nargothrond:  the  King  of  Nargothrond  is  the  King   of  Narog
 (see lines 1782, 1866).                                                       
                                                                              
                                    VII.                                       
                                                                              
           Thus twelve alone there ventured forth                              
           from Nargothrond, and to the North                           1925
           they turned their silent secret way,                                
           and vanished in the fading day.                                     
           No trumpet sounds, no voice there sings,                            
           as robed in mail of cunning rings                                   
           now blackened dark with helmets grey                         1930
           and sombre cloaks they steal away.                                  
           Far-journeying Narog's leaping course                               
           they followed till they found his source,                           
           the flickering falls, whose freshets sheer                          
           a glimmering goblet glassy-clear                             1935
           with crystal waters fill that shake                                 
           and quiver down from Ivrin's lake,                                  
           from Ivrin's mere that mirrors dim                                  
           the pallid faces bare and grim                                      
           of Shadowy Mountains neath the moon.                         1940
                                                                              
             Now far beyond the realm immune                                   
           from Orc and demon and the dread                                    

 of Morgoth's might their ways had led.                     
 In woods o'ershadowed by the heights                       
 they watched and waited many nights,                 1945
 till on a time when hurrying cloud                         
 did moon and constellation shroud,                         
 and winds of autumn's wild beginning                       
 soughed in the boughs, and leaves went spinning            
                                                           
 down the dark eddies rustling soft,                    1950
                                                           
 they heard a murmur hoarsely waft                          
 from far, a croaking laughter coming;                      
 now louder; now they heard the drumming                    
 of hideous stamping feet that tramp                        
 the weary earth. Then many a lamp                     1955
 of sullen red they saw draw near,                          
 swinging, and glistening on spear                          
 and scimitar. There hidden nigh                            
 they saw a band of Orcs go by                              
 with goblin-faces swart and foul.                    I 960
 Bats were about them, and the owl,                         
 the ghostly forsaken night-bird cried                      
 from trees above. The voices died,                         
 the laughter like clash of stone and steel                 
 passed and faded. At their heel                      1965
 the Elves and Beren crept more soft                        
 than foxes stealing through a croft                        
 in search of prey. Thus to the camp                        
 lit by flickering fire and lamp                            
 they stole, and counted sitting there                1970
 full thirty Orcs in the red flare                          
 of burning wood. Without a sound                           
 they one by one stood silent round,                        
 each in the shadow of a tree;                              
 each slowly, grimly, secretly                        1975
 bent then his bow and drew the string.                     
                                                           
 Hark! how they sudden twang and sing,                      
 when Felagund lets forth a cry;                            
 and twelve Orcs sudden fall and die.                       
 Then forth they leap casting their bows.             1980
 Out their bright swords, and swift their blows!            
 The stricken Orcs now shriek and yell                      
 as lost things deep in lightless hell.                     

 Battle there is beneath the trees               
 bitter and swift; but no Orc flees;         1985
 there left their lives that wandering band      
 and stained no more the sorrowing land          
 with rape and murder. Yet no song               
 of joy, or triumph over wrong,                  
 the Elves there sang. In peril sore         1990
 they were, for never alone to war               
 so small an Orc-band went, they knew.           
 Swiftly the raiment off they drew               
 and cast the corpses in a pit.                  
 This desperate counsel had the wit          1995
 of Felagund for them devised:                   
 as Orcs his comrades he disguised.              
                                                
 The poisoned spears, the bows of horn,          
 the crooked swords their foes had borne         
 they took; and loathing each him clad       2000
 in Angband's raiment foul and sad.              
 They smeared their hands and faces fair         
 with pigment dark; the matted hair              
 all lank and black from goblin head             
 they shore, and joined it thread by thread  2005
 with Gnomish skill. As each one leers           
 at each dismayed, about his ears                
 he hangs it noisome, shuddering.                
 Then Felagund a spell did sing                  
 of changing and of shifting shape;          2010
 their ears grew hideous, and agape              
 their mouths did start, and like a fang         
 each tooth became, as slow he sang.             
 Their Gnomish raiment then they hid,            
 and one by one behind him slid,             2015
 behind a foul and goblin thing                  
 that once was elven-fair and king.              
                                                
   Northward they went; and Orcs they met        
 who passed, nor did their going let,            
 but hailed them in greeting; and more bold  2020
 they grew as past the long miles rolled.        
   At length they came with weary feet           
 beyond Beleriand. They found the fleet          
 young waters, rippling, silver-pale             

           
                                                    
 of Sirion hurrying through that vale            2025
 where Taur-na-Fuin, Deadly Night,                   
 the trackless forest's pine-clad height,            
 falls dark forbidding slowly down                   
 upon the east, while westward frown                 
 the northward-bending Mountains grey            2030
 and bar the westering light of day.                 
                                                    
 An isled hill there stood alone                     
 amid the valley, like a stone                       
 rolled from the distant mountains vast              
 when giants in tumult hurtled past.             2035
 Around its feet the river looped                    
 a stream divided, that had scooped                  
 the hanging edges into caves.                       
 There briefly shuddered Sirion's waves              
 and ran to other shores more clean.             2040
 An elven watchtower had it been,                    
 and strong it was, and still was fair;              
 but now did grim with menace stare                  
 one way to pale Beleriand,                          
 the other to that mournful land                 2045
 beyond the valley's northern mouth.                 
 Thence could be glimpsed the fields of drouth,      
 the dusty dunes, the desert wide;                   
 and further far could be descried                   
 the brooding cloud that hangs and lowers        2050
 on Thangorodrim's thunderous towers.                
                                                    
  Now in that hill was the abode                     
 of one most evil; and the road                      
 that from Beleriand thither came                    
 he watched with sleepless eyes of flame.        2055
 (From the North there led no other way,             
 save east where the Gorge of Aglon lay,             
 and that dark path of hurrying dread                
 which only in need the Orcs would tread             
 through Deadly Nightshade's awful gloom         2060
 where Taur-na-Fuin's branches loom;                 
 and Aglon led to Doriath,                           
 and Feanor's sons watched o'er that path.)          
                                                    
        Men called him Thu, and as a god             

 in after days beneath his rod                 2065
 bewildered bowed to him, and made                 
 his ghastly temples in the shade.                 
 Not yet by Men enthralled adored,                 
 now was he Morgoth's mightiest lord,              
 Master of Wolves, whose shivering howl        2070
 for ever echoed in the hills, and foul            
 enchantments and dark sigaldry                    
 did weave and wield. In glamoury                  
 that necromancer held his hosts                   
 of phantoms and of wandering ghosts,          2075
 of misbegotten or spell-wronged                   
 monsters that about him thronged,                 
 working his bidding dark and vile:                
 the werewolves of the Wizard's Isle.              
                                                  
 From Thu their coming was not hid;            2080
 and though beneath the eaves they slid            
 of the forest's gloomy-hanging boughs,            
 he saw them afar, and wolves did rouse:           
 'Go! fetch me those sneaking Orcs,' he said,      
 'that fare thus strangely, as if in dread,    2085
 and do not come, as all Orcs use                  
 and are commanded, to bring me news               
 of all their deeds, to me, to Thu.'               
                                                  
 From his tower he gazed, and in him grew          
 suspicion and a brooding thought,             2090
 waiting, leering, till they were brought.         
 Now ringed about with wolves they stand,          
 and fear their doom. Alas! the land,              
 the land of Narog left behind!                    
 Foreboding evil weights their mind,           2095
 as downcast, halting, they must go                
 and cross the stony bridge of woe                 
 to Wizard's Isle, and to the throne               
 there fashioned of blood-darkened stone.          
                                                  
   'Where have ye been? What have ye seen? '   2100
                                                  
   'In  Elfinesse;  and  tears  and  distress,     
 the  fire  blowing  and  the  blood  flowing,     
 these  have  we  seen,  there  have  we been.     
 Thirty we slew and their bodies threw             

 in a dark pit. The ravens sit                2105
 and the owl cries where our swath lies.'         
                                                 
 'Come, tell me true, 0 Morgoth's thralls,        
 what then in Elfinesse befalls?                  
 What of Nargothrond? Who reigneth there?         
 Into that realm did your feet dare?'         2110
                                                 
   'Only its borders did we dare.                 
 There reigns King Felagund the fair.'            
                                                 
   'Then heard ye not that he is gone,            
 that Celegorm sits his throne upon?'             
                                                 
   'That is not true! If he is gone,          2115
 then Orodreth sits his throne upon.'             
                                                 
 'Sharp are your ears, swift have they got       
 tidings of realms ye entered not!                
 What are your names, 0 spearmen bold?            
 Who your captain, ye have not told.'         2120
                                                 
    'Nereb and Dungalef and warriors ten,         
 so we are called, and dark our den               
 under the mountains. Over the waste              
 we march on an errand of need and haste.         
 Boldog the captain awaits us there           2125
 where fires from under smoke and flare.'         
                                                 
    'Boldog, I heard, was lately slain            
 warring on the borders of that domain            
 where Robber Thingol and outlaw folk             
 cringe and crawl beneath elm and oak         2130
 in drear Doriath. Heard ye not then              
 of that pretty fay, of Luthien?                  
 Her body is fair, very white and fair.           
 Morgoth would possess her in his lair.           
 Boldog he sent, but Boldog was slain:        2135
 strange ye were not in Boldog's train.           
    Nereb looks fierce, his frown is grim.        
 Little Luthien! What troubles him?               
 Why laughs he not to think of his lord           
 crushing a maiden in his hoard,              2140
 that foul should be what once was clean,         
 that dark should be where light has been?        

 Whom do ye serve, Light or Mirk?                
 Who is the maker of mightiest work?             
 Who is the king of earthly kings,               
 the greatest giver of gold and rings?           
 Who is the master of the wide earth?            
 Who despoiled them of their mirth,              
 the greedy Gods? Repeat your vows,              
 Orcs of Bauglir! Do not bend your brows!   2150
 Death to light, to law, to love!                
 Cursed be moon and stars above!                 
 May darkness everlasting old                    
 that waits outside in surges cold               
 drown Manwe, Varda, and the sun!           2155
 May all in hatred be begun,                     
 and all in evil ended be,                       
 in the moaning of the endless Sea! '            
                                                
   But no true Man nor Elf  yet free             
 would  ever  speak  that blasphemy,        2160
 and  Beren  muttered:  'Who  is Thu             
 to hinder work that is to do?                   
 Him we  serve not,  nor to  him owe             
 obeisance,  and  we now  would go.'             
                                                
 Thu laughed: 'Patience! Not very long      2165
 shall ye abide. But first a song                
 I will sing to you, to ears intent.'            
 Then his flaming eyes he on them bent,          
 and darkness black fell round them all.         
 Only they saw as through a pall            2170
 of eddying smoke those eyes profound            
 in which their senses choked and drowned.       
 He chanted a song of wizardry,                  
 of piercing, opening, of treachery,             
 revealing, uncovering, betraying.          2175
 Then sudden Felagund there swaying              
 sang in answer a song of staying,               
 resisting, battling against power,              
 of secrets kept, strength like a tower,         
 and trust unbroken, freedom, escape;       2180
 of changing and of shifting shape,              
 of snares eluded, broken traps,                 
 the prison opening, the chain that snaps.       

                                                    
                                                     
 Backwards and forwards swayed their song.            
 Reeling and foundering, as ever more strong      2185
 Thu's chanting swelled, Felagund fought,             
 and all the magic and might he brought               
 of Elfinesse into his words.                         
 Softly in the gloom they heard the birds             
 singing afar in Nargothrond,                     2190
 the sighing of the sea beyond,                       
 beyond the western world, on sand,                   
 on sand of pearls in Elvenland.                      
                                                     
 Then the gloom gathered: darkness growing            
 in Valinor, the red blood flowing                2195
 beside the sea, where the Gnomes slew                
 the Foamriders, and stealing drew                    
 their white ships with their white sails             
 from lamplit havens. The wind wails.                 
 The wolf howls. The ravens flee.                 2200
 The ice mutters in the mouths of the sea.            
 The captives sad in Angband mourn.                   
 Thunder rumbles, the fires burn,                     
 a vast smoke gushes out, a roar -                    
 and Felagund swoons upon the floor.              2205
                                                     
   Behold! they are in their own fair shape,          
 fairskinned, brighteyed. No longer gape              
 Orclike their mouths; and now they stand             
 betrayed into the wizard's hand.                     
 Thus came they unhappy into woe,                 2210
 to dungeons no hope nor glimmer know,                
 where chained in chains that eat the flesh           
 and woven in webs of strangling mesh                 
 they lay forgotten, in despair.                      
                                                     
   Yet not all unavailing were                    2215
 the spells of Felagund; for Thu                      
 neither their names nor purpose knew.                
 These much he pondered and bethought,                
 and in their woeful chains them sought,              
 and threatened all with dreadful death,          2220
 if one would not with traitor's breath               
 reveal this knowledge. Wolves should come            
 and slow devour them one by one                      

          before the others' eyes, and last                           
          should one alone be left aghast,                     2225
          then in a place of horror hung                              
          with anguish should his limbs be wrung,                     
          in the bowels of the earth be slow                          
          endlessly, cruelly, put to woe                              
          and torment, till he all declared.                   2230
                                                                     
          Even as he threatened, so it fared.                         
          From time to time in the eyeless dark                       
          two eyes would grow, and they would hark                    
          to frightful cries, and then a sound                        
          of rending, a slavering on the ground,               2235
          and blood flowing they would smell.                         
          But none would yield, and none would tell.                  
                                                                     
                               NOTES.                                 
                                                                     
   1943.  Against the end of this line is written the date  'March 30
          1928'. The previous date was  29 March  1928 at  line 1736.
  2023.   (and subsequently) Broseliand A, and B as typed.            
  2026.   Deadly  Night]  Tangled  Night  A,  and  B  as  typed.  Cf.
          Deadly  Nightshade  as  a  name  of  Taur-na-Fuin   in  The
          Children of Hurin (p. 55) and at line  2060 in  the present
          Canto.                                                     
  2047.   fields of drouth: the expression Plains of Drouth occurs in
          The Children of Hurin, p. 36, line 826.                    
 2056-63. These lines are marked with an X and a sign for deletion in
          the B-text, probably not  on account  of anything  in their
          content but because my father felt them to be intrusive.
 2064-6.  Emended in B to:                                            
                                                                     
                    Gnomes called him Gorthu, as a god                
                    in after days beneath his rod                     
                    bewildered they bowed to him, and made            
                                                                     
          (Sauron was first substituted for Thu! Men is written beside
          they in line 2066.) Thu  > Corthu  at all  subsequent occur-
          rences in this Canto, or the name avoided by substitution of
          pronoun  or  article;  thus 2088 of all  their deeds  to me,
          Corthu;  2161  -  2  Doth  Corthu/now  hinder  work;  2165
          He laughed; 2186 the chanting; etc.                         

                 This  change  is  difficult  to  date,  hut was  made when
              Gnomes  was  still  employed  (2064). In  Canto VIII  Thu was
              left  unchanged,  and  subsequently,  until  3290,  which was
              emended  to  where  Corthu reigned;  at the  end of  the poem
              (3947, 3951) Thu was changed to Sauron.                     
  2100 - 6.   On the changed metre of these lines see the Commentary.        
     2114.   After this line is written the date 'March 31st' (i.e. 1928).
              The previous date was 30 March 1928 at line 1943.              
     2121.    Nereb  and  Dungalef:  emended  in  B to  Wrath and  Hate, at
              the same time as Thu > Gorthu.                                 
     2137.    Nereb  looks fierce:  emended in  B to  Fierce is  your chief.
      2155.   Bridhil A, and B as typed; the  change to  Varda made  at the
              same time as Thu to Gorthu. Cf. note to line 1620.             
   2175-7.    The three rhyming  lines go  back through  A to  the original
              draft.                                                         
     2193.    Elvenland is an emendation to B Fairyland.                     
                                                                            
                           Commentary on Canto VII.                          
                                                                            
 The plot-outline 'Synopsis I' for the  narrative in  this Canto  has already
 been  given (pp.  219-20). 'Synopsis  II' continues  from the  point reached
 on p. 221.                                                                  
                                                                            
      They  ambush  an  Orc-band,  and  disguising  themselves  in  the  rai-
   ment  and  fashion  of  the  slain,  march   on  Northward.   Between  the
   Shadowy  Mountains  and  the  Forest  of  Night,  where the  young Sirion
   flows  in  the  narrowing  valley,  they  come  upon the  werewolves, and
   the host of Thu Lord of   Wolves. They are taken before     Thu,    andaftcr
   a contest of riddling  questions and  answers are  revealed as  spies, but
   Beren  is  taken  as a  Gnome, and  that Felagund  is King  of Nargothrond
   remains hidden.                                                           
      They  are  placed  in  a deep  dungeon. Thu  desires to  discover their
   purpose  and  real  names  and  vows  death,  one by  one, and  torment to
   the last one, if they  will not  reveal them.  From time  to time  a great
   werewolf  [struck  through:  Thu  in  disguise]   comes  and   devours  one
   of the companions.                                                        
                                                                            
 This is obviously  the narrative  basis for  Canto VII,  and the  story here
 reaches  its  final  form. There  may seem  to be  a difference  between the
 outline  and  the Lay,  in that  the former  says that  'after a  contest of
 riddling questions and answers they are revealed as  spies', whereas  in the
 latter  Felagund  is  overcome  by  song  of  greater  power.  In  fact, the
 riddling contest is present,  but seems  not to  have been  fully developed.
 In  the  original draft  my father  scribbled the  following note  before he
 wrote the passage lines 2100 ff.:                                          

 Riddling  questions.  Where  have  you  been,  who  have  you  slain? Thirty
 men.   Who   reigns   in   Nargothrond?   Who  is   captain  of   Orcs?  Who
 wrought  the  world?  Who  is  king  &c.  They  show  Elfin [?bias]  and too
 little  knowledge  of  Angband,  too  much  of  Elfland.  Thu  and  Felagund
 .....  enchantments  against  one  another  and   Thu's  slowly   win,  till
 they stand revealed as Elves.                                               
                                                                            
 Lines 2100  - 6  are in  a changed  metre, especially  suitable to  a riddle
 contest,  and  their content  (the reply  to Thu's  question 'Where  have ye
 been? What have ye seen?')  is riddling  ('misleading accuracy').  But after
 this  the  verse  returns  to  the  common metre,  and the  riddling element
 disappears  (except  in  dark  our  den/under   the  mountains).   The  name
 Dungalef  (2121),  though  it  sounds  Orcish  enough,  was an  oddly trans-
 parent  device, since  Felagund had  just been  mentioned; but  it succeeded
 (2217). No doubt Thu's ponderings on the matter were too subtle.            
 This is the first full  portrait of  Thu, who  emerges as  a being  of great
 power,  far advanced  in sorcery,  and is  indeed here  called 'necromancer'
 (2074). Here also is the first suggestion that his history would  extend far
 beyond  the  tale  of  Beren  and Luthien,  when 'in  after days'  Men would
 worship him, and build 'his ghastly temples in the shade'.                  
 It is in this Canto, also, that the island in the river Sirion (not actually
 mentioned  in  Synopsis  II)  makes  its first  appearance, together  with a
 mention of the origin of the fortress:                                      
                                                                            
                       An elven watchtower had it been,                      
                  and strong it was, and still was fair.  (2041-2)           
                                                                            
 My father's  drawing (Pictures  by J. R. R.  Tolkien, no.  36) was  made at
 Lyme  Regis  in  Dorset  in  July 1928,  less than  four months  after these
 lines were written; and in the  drawing the  caves scooped  by the  waters in
 the edges of the island (lines 2037-8) can be seen.                         
 The  Shadowy  Mountains  referred  to  in  Synopsis  II  and  in   the  poem
 are no longer  the Mountains  of Terror  (Ered Gorgoroth),  as they  were at
 lines 386, 1318 (see pp. 170 - z). In Synopsis II it is said that  the young
 Sirion  flows  in  the  narrowing  valley  between  the   Shadowy  Mountains
 and  the  Forest  of  Night  (Taur-na-Fuin),  and in  the poem  Ivrin's lake
 mirrors                                                                     
                                                                            
                the pallid faces bare and grim                               
                of Shadowy Mountains neath the moon (1939 - 40)              
                                                                            
 as  in  The  Children  of Hurin  (p. 62,  lines 1581-z).  Thus the  term now
 reverts to its meaning in  the alliterative  poem, a  meaning that  it would
 henceforward retain.  It is  also to  be noted  that this  mountain-range is
 'northward-bending' (2030).                                                 
 The lines concerning Ivrin in The Children of Hurin (1594 - 7):            
                                                                            
             newborn Narog, nineteen fathoms                                 
             o'er a flickering force falls in wonder,                        

              and a glimmering goblet with glass-lucent                              
              fountains fills he by his freshets carven                              
                                                                                    
 are echoed in The Lay of Leithian (1934 - 6):                                     
                                                                                    
              the flickering falls, whose freshets sheer                             
              a glimmering goblet glassy-clear                                       
              with crystal waters fill...                                            
                                                                                    
   A  new  feature  of  the  northern  lands  appears  in  this  Canto:   the  Gorge
 of  Aglon  (2057),  already  placed  (as  other  evidence  shows) at  the eastern
 end  of  Taur-na-Fuin;  and  line  2063  gives  the  first  indication   that  this
 region was the territory of the Feanorians.                                         
                                                                                    
               The raid of the Orc-captain Boldog into Doriath, seeking to capture
             Luthien for Morgoth, was an important element in the history of this
              time, though later it disappeared and there is no trace of it in The
    Silmarillion. Discussion of it is postponed till later in the Lay of Leithian,
         but it may be noticed here that an early reference to it is found in The
        Children of Hurin (p. 16 lines 392 - 4, p. 117 lines 764-6). There it was
                  Thu himself who was bidden by Morgoth go ravage the realm of the
                  robber Thingol.
                                                                                    
   The  term  Foamriders,  used of  the Third  Kindred of  the Elves  in line        
  2197, is found earlier  in the  alliterative Flight  of the  Noldoli (see        
                                                                                    
 p.140).                                                                             
                                                                                    
                                          VIII.                                     
                                                                                    
             Hounds there were in Valinor                                            
             with silver collars. Hart and boar,                                     
             the fox and hare and nimble roe                                     2240
             there in the forests green did go.                                      
             Orome was the lord divine                                               
             of all those woods. The potent wine                                     
             went in his halls and hunting song.                                     
             The Gnomes anew have named him long                                 2245
             Tavros, the God whose horns did blow                                    
             over the mountains long ago;                                            
             who alone of Gods had loved the world                                   
             before the banners were unfurled                                        
             of Moon and Sun; and shod with gold                                 2250
             were his great horses. Hounds untold                                    
             baying in woods beyond the West                                         

 of race immortal he possessed:                  
 grey and limber, black and strong,              
 white with silken coats and long,           2255
 brown and brindled, swift and true              
 as arrow from a bow of yew;                     
 their voices like the deeptoned bells           
 that ring in Valmar's citadels,                 
 their eyes like living jewels, their teeth  2260
 like ruel-bone. As sword from sheath            
 they flashed and fled from leash to scent       
 for Tavros' joy and merriment.                  
                                                
 In Tavros' friths and pastures green            
 had Huan once a young whelp been.           2265
 He grew the swiftest of the swift,              
 and Orome gave him as a gift                    
 to Celegorm, who loved to follow                
 the great God's horn o'er hill and hollow.      
 Alone of hounds of the Land of Light,       2270
 when sons of Feanor took to flight              
 and came into the North, he stayed              
 beside his master. Every raid                   
 and every foray wild he shared,                 
 and into mortal battle dared.               2275
 Often he saved his Gnomish lord                 
 from Orc and wolf and leaping sword.            
 A wolf-hound, tireless, grey and fierce         
 he grew; his gleaming eyes would pierce         
 all shadows and all mist, the scent         2280
 moons old he found through fen and bent,        
 through rustling leaves and dusty sand;         
 all paths of wide Beleriand                     
 he knew. But wolves, he loved them best;        
 he loved to find their throats and wrest    2285
 their snarling lives and evil breath.           
 The packs of Thu him feared as Death.           
 No wizardry, nor spell, nor dart,               
 no fang, nor venom devil's art                  
 could brew had harmed him; for his weird    2290
 was woven. Yet he little feared                 
 that fate decreed and known to all:             
 before the mightiest he should fall,            

     
                                                  
 before the mightiest wolf alone                   
 that ever was whelped in cave of stone.       2295
                                                  
 Hark! afar in Nargothrond,                        
 far over Sirion and beyond,                       
 there are dim cries and horns blowing,            
 and barking hounds through the trees going.       
 The hunt is up, the woods are stirred.        2300
 Who rides to-day? Ye have not heard               
 that Celegorm and Curufin                         
 have loosed their dogs? With merry din            
 they mounted ere the sun arose,                   
 and took their spears and took their bows.    2305
 The wolves of Thu of late have dared              
 both far and wide. Their eyes have glared         
 by night across the roaring stream                
 of Narog. Doth their master dream,                
 perchance, of plots and counsels deep,        2310
 of secrets that the Elf-lords keep,               
 of movements in the Gnomish realm                 
 and errands under beech and elm?                  
                                                  
 Curufin spake: 'Good brother mine,                
 I like it not. What dark design               2315
 doth this portend? These evil things,             
 we swift must end their wanderings!               
 And more, 'twould please my heart full well       
 to hunt a while and wolves to fell.'              
 And then he leaned and whispered low          2320
 that Orodreth was a dullard slow;                 
 long time it was since the king had gone,         
 and rumour or tidings came there none.            
 'At least thy profit it would be                  
 to know whether dead he is or free;           2325
 to gather thy men and thy array.                  
 "I go to hunt" then thou wilt say,                
 and men will think that Narog's good              
 ever thou heedest. But in the wood                
 things may be learned; and if by grace,       2330
 by some blind fortune he retrace                  
 his footsteps mad, and if he bear                 
 a Silmaril - I need declare                       
 no more in words; but one by right                

 is thine (and ours), the jewel of light;     2335
 another may be won - a throne.                   
 The eldest blood our house doth own.'            
                                                 
 Celegorm listened. Nought he said,               
 but forth a mighty host he led;                  
 and Huan leaped at the glad sounds,          2340
 the chief and captain of his hounds.             
 Three days they ride by holt and hill            
 the wolves of Thu to hunt and kill,              
 and many a head and fell of grey                 
 they take, and many drive away,              2345
 till nigh to the borders in the West             
 of Doriath a while they rest.                    
                                                 
 There were dim cries and horns blowing,          
 and barking dogs through the woods going.        
 The hunt was up. The woods were stirred,     2350
 and one there fled like startled bird,           
 and fear was in her dancing feet.                
 She knew not who the woods did beat.             
 Far from her home, forwandered, pale,            
 she flitted ghostlike through the vale;       2355
 ever her heart bade her up and on,               
 but her limbs were worn, her eyes were wan.      
 The eyes of Huan saw a shade                     
 wavering, darting down a glade                   
 like a mist of evening snared by day         2360
 and hasting fearfully away.                      
 He bayed, and sprang with sinewy limb            
 to chase the shy thing strange and dim.          
 On terror's wings, like a butterfly              
 pursued by a sweeping bird on high,          2365
 she fluttered hither, darted there,              
 now poised, now flying through the air -         
 in vain. At last against a tree                  
 she leaned and panted. Up leaped he.             
 No word of magic gasped with woe,            2370
 no elvish mystery she did know                   
 or had entwined in raiment dark                  
 availed against that hunter stark,               
 whose old immortal race and kind                 
 no spells could ever turn or bind.           2375

                                             
                                                
 Huan alone that she ever met                    
 she never in enchantment set                    
 nor bound with spells. But loveliness           
 and gentle voice and pale distress              
 and eyes like starlight dimmed with tears   2380
 tamed him that death nor monster fears.         
                                                
   Lightly he lifted her, light he bore          
 his trembling burden. Never before              
 had Celegorm beheld such prey:                  
 'What hast thou brought, good Huan say!     2385
 Dark-elvish maid, or wraith, or fay?            
 Not such to hunt we came today.'                
                                                
 "Tis Luthien of Doriath,'                       
 the maiden spake. 'A wandering path             
 far from the Wood-'Elves' sunny glades      2390
 she sadly winds, where courage fades            
 and hope grows faint.' And as she spoke         
 down she let slip her shadowy cloak,            
 and there she stood in silver and white.        
 Her starry jewels twinkled bright           2395
 in the risen sun like morning dew;              
 the lilies gold on mantle blue                  
 gleamed and glistened. Who could gaze           
 on that fair face without amaze?                
 Long did Curufin look and stare.            2400
 The perfume of her flower-twined hair,           
 her lissom limbs, her elvish face,              
 smote to his heart, and in that place           
 enchained he stood. '0 maiden royal,            
 0 lady fair, wherefore in toil              2405
 and lonely journey dost thou go?                
 What tidings dread of war and woe               
 In Doriath have betid? Come tell!               
 For fortune thee hath guided well;              
 friends thou hast found,' said Celegorm,    2410
 and gazed upon her elvish form.                 
                                                
   In his heart him thought her tale unsaid      
 he knew in part, but nought she read            
 of guile upon his smiling face.                 
   'Who are ye then, the lordly chase        2415

             
                                                
 that follow in this perilous wood?'             
 she asked; and answer seeming-good              
 they gave. 'Thy servants, lady sweet,           
 lords of Nargothrond thee greet,                
 and beg that thou wouldst with them go      2420
 back to their hills, forgetting woe             
 a season, seeking hope and rest.                
 And now to hear thy tale were best.'            
                                                
 So Luthien tells of Beren's deeds               
 in northern lands, how fate him leads       2425
 to Doriath, of Thingol's ire,                   
 the dreadful errand that her sire               
 decreed for Beren.. Sign nor word               
 the brothers gave that aught they heard         
 that touched them near. Of her escape       2430
 and the marvellous mantle she did shape         
 she lightly tells, but words her fail           
 recalling sunlight in the vale,                 
 moonlight, starlight in Doriath,                
 ere Beren took the perilous path.           2435
 'Need, too, my lords, there is of haste!        
 No time in ease and rest to waste.              
 For days are gone now since the queen,          
 Melian whose heart hath vision keen,            
 looking afar me said in fear                2440
 that Beren lived in bondage drear.              
 The Lord of Wolves hath prisons dark,           
 chains and enchantments cruel and stark,        
 and there entrapped and languishing             
 doth Beren lie - if direr thing             2445
 hath not brought death or wish for death':      
 than gasping woe bereft her breath.             
                                                
 To Celegorm said Curufin                        
 apart and low: 'Now news we win                 
 of Felagund, and now we know                2450
 wherefore Thu's creatures prowling go',         
 and other whispered counsels spake,             
 and showed him what answer he should make.      
 'Lady,' said Celegorm, 'thou seest              
 we go a-hunting roaming beast,              2455
 and though our host is great and bold,          

     
                                              
 'tis ill prepared the wizard's hold           
 and island fortress to assault.               
 Deem not our hearts or wills at fault.        
 Lo I here our chase we now forsake     2460
 and home our swiftest road we take,           
 counsel and aid there to devise               
 for Beren that in anguish lies.'              
                                              
 To Nargothrond they with them bore            
 Luthien, whose heart misgave her sore.   2465
 Delay she feared; each moment pressed         
 upon her spirit, yet she guessed              
 they rode not as swiftly as they might.       
 Ahead leaped Huan day and night,              
 and ever looking back his thought        2470
 was troubled. What his master sought,         
 and why he rode not like the fire,            
 why Curufin looked with hot desire            
 on Luthien, he pondered deep,                 
 and felt some evil shadow creep          2475
 of ancient curse o'er Elfinesse.              
 His heart was torn for the distress            
 of Beren bold, and Luthien dear,              
 and Felagund who knew no fear.                
                                              
 In Nargothrond the torches flared        2480
 and feast and music were prepared.            
 Luthien feasted not but wept.                 
 Her ways were trammelled; closely kept        
 she might not fly. Her magic cloak            
 was hidden, and no prayer she spoke      2485
 was heeded, nor did answer find               
 her eager questions. Out of mind,             
 it seemed, were those afar that pined         
 in anguish and in dungeons blind              
 in prison and in misery.                 2490
 Too late she knew their treachery.            
 It was not hid in Nargothrond                 
 that Feanor's sons her held in bond,          
 who Beren heeded not, and who                 
 had little cause to wrest from Thu      2495
 the king they loved not and whose quest       
 old vows of hatred in their breast            

                      
                                                  
 had roused from sleep. Orodreth knew              
 the purpose dark they would pursue:               
 King Felagund to leave to die,                2500
 and with King Thingol's blood ally                
 the house of Feanor by force                      
 or treaty. But to stay their course               
 he had no power, for all his folk                 
 the brothers had yet beneath their yoke,      2505
 and all yet listened to their word.               
 Orodreth's counsel no man heard;                  
 their shame they crushed, and would not heed      
 the tale of Felagund's dire need.                 
                                                  
 At Luthien's feet there day by day            2510
 and at night beside her couch would stay          
 Huan the hound of Nargothrond;                    
 and words she spoke to him soft and fond:         
 '0 Huan, Huan, swiftest hound                     
 that ever ran on mortal ground,               2515
 what evil doth thy lords possess                  
 to heed no tears nor my distress?                 
 Once Barahir all men above                        
 good hounds did cherish and did love;             
 once Beren in the friendless North,           2520
 when outlaw wild he wandered forth,               
 had friends unfailing among things                
 with fur and fell and feathered wings,            
 and among the spirits that in stone               
 in mountains old and wastes alone             2525
 still dwell. But now nor Elf nor Man,             
 none save the child of Melian,                    
 remembers him who Morgoth fought                  
 and never to thraldom base was brought.'          
                                                  
  Nought said Huan; but Curufin                2530
 thereafter never near might win                   
 to Luthien, nor touch that maid,                  
 but shrank from Huan's fangs afraid.              
  Then on a night when autumn damp                 
 was swathed about the glimmering lamp         2535
 of the wan moon, and fitful stars                 
 were flying seen between the bars                 
 of racing cloud, when winter's horn               

         already wound in trees forlorn,                                
         lo! Huan was gone. Then Luthien lay                     2540
         fearing new wrong, till just ere day,                          
         when all is dead and breathless still                          
         and shapeless fears the sleepless fill,                        
         a shadow came along the wall.                                  
         Then something let there softly fall                    2545
         her magic cloak beside her couch.                              
         Trembling she saw the great hound crouch                       
         beside her, heard a deep voice swell                           
         as from a tower a far slow bell.                               
                                                                       
         Thus Huan spake, who never before                       2550
         had uttered words, and but twice more                          
         did speak in elven tongue again:                               
         'Lady beloved, whom all Men,                                   
         whom Elfinesse, and whom all things                            
         with fur and fell and feathered wings                   2555
         should serve and love - arise! away!                           
         Put on thy cloak! Before the day                               
         comes over Nargothrond we fly                                  
         to Northern perils, thou and 1.'                               
         And ere he ceased he counsel wrought                    2560
         for achievement of the thing they sought.                      
         There Luthien listened in amaze,                               
         and softly on Huan did she gaze.                               
         Her arms about his neck she cast -                             
         in friendship that to death should last.                2565
                                                                       
                            NOTES                                       
                                                                       
  2246.  Tavros not emended, nor at lines 2263 - 4 (see p. 195, note to
         lines 891, 904) -                                              
                                                                       
  2248.  of Cods had loved B] of Valar loved A                          
  2283.  Beleriand] Broseliand A, and B as typed.                       
  2385.  After this line is written the date 'April 2nd'. The previous
         date was 31 March 1928 at line 2114.                          
  2423.  After this line is written the date 'April 3rd'. The previous
         date was 2 April 1928 at line 2385.                            
 2442-4. Cf. lines 1246 - 8.                                            

 2484-5. The reference to the hiding of Luthien's cloak is not in A.                           
 2522-6. Cf. lines 349 - 53. Line 2523 is repeated at 2555.                                   
   2551. Bat twice more emendation in B; nor ever more A, but                              
               once more B as typed.                                                           
               elven: elfin B, but since elfin is changed at almost every .                    
               occurrence I have done so here.                                                 
                                                                                              
                                   Commentary on Canto VIII.                                   
                                                                                              
 The development of the narrative  of this  Canto from  the Tale  of Tinuviel                  
 to The Silmarillion can be followed step by step. The first stage is seen in                  
 the very brief  words of  the 'Sketch',  following on  the passage  given on                  
 p. 220.                                                                                       
                                                                                              
   Luthien is imprisoned by Thingol, but escapes and  goes in  search of                       
   Beren. With the aid of Huan lord of dogs she rescues Beren [i.e. from                       
   'Thu the hunter'], and gains entrance to Angband...                                         
                                                                                              
 This is too compressed to reveal what ideas underlay it; but at least it is                   
 clear that Huan was still independent of  any master.  In the  earliest map                   
 Huan is assigned a territory (south and  east of  Ivrin), and  this clearly                   
 belongs with the old conception.                                                              
   Synopsis I, a little later than the 'Sketch' (see p. 220), continues from                   
 the point reached on pp. 219-20:                                                             
                                                                                              
   Tinuviel flies in her magic robe, she meets  Celegorm out  hunting, and                     
   is  pursued  by  him and  captured by  Huan his  dog and  hurt. [Struck                     
   out: In redress he offers to help] He offers redress - but cannot help;                     
   he  lent  his  Gnomes to  Beren and  all perished,  and so  must Beren.                     
   Huan goes with her.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 A little later in the outline it is said:                                                     
                                                                                              
                  It was written in the fate of Huan that he could only be slain by a wolf.
                                                                                              
   At  this  stage,  where  Celegorm was  the ruler  of Nargothrond  to whom                   
 Beren  went  in  his  trouble,  Celegorm  'lent  his  Gnomes'   to  Beren;*                   
 Luthien  fleeing  from  Doriath  was  pursued by  Celegorm while  out hunt-                   
 ing  and  was  hurt by  Huan, who  now first  appears as  Celegorm's hound.                   
 Here  there  is  no  suggestion  of  evil  behaviour  towards  her  (and no                   
 mention of  Curufin); Celegorm  is unable  to assist  her, further  than he                   
 has already assisted Beren, but Huan goes with her on  her quest:  was this                   
 the 'redress' for her hurt that Celegorm offered her? It is not said. It is                   
 clear that the position of the  ruler of  Nargothrond as  a son  of Feanor,                   
                                                                                              
 (* If the previous passage of Synopsis I (p. 219) is strictly interpreted Celegorm went with
 Beren from Nargothrond,  but this  is obviously  not meant:  my father  must have  struck out
 more than he intended to. It is now clear that in this form of  the story  Celegorm disguised
 Beren and gave him guides.)                                                                    

  bound  by  the  Oath, must  have developed  quite differently  if this  form of           
  the story  had  been  retained,  since  he  was  also  sworn  to  aid the  kin of           
  Barahir (see below, p. 247).                                                                
                                                                                             
     In  Synopsis  II,  given  on  p. 233  to the  point equivalent  to the  end of           
  Canto  VII,  the  plot  reaches  almost  to  its  development  in  the present           
  Canto of the Lay; but this was achieved in  stages, and  the original  text of           
  the outline was  so much  changed and  extended by  later alterations  that it           
  would be  extremely difficult  to follow  if set  out as  hitherto. I  give it           
  therefore in two forms. As first written it read:                                            
                                                                                             
                            Curufin and Celegorm go hunting with all their hounds. Huan the
  sleepless is the chief. He is proof against magic sleep or death - it is his
  fate to be slain only by the 'greatest wolf'. They espy Luthien who
  flees,  but  is  caught  by  Huan  whom  she  cannot  enchant.  The  hound           
  bears  her  to  Celegorm,   who  learns   her  purpose.   Hearing  who   she  is,           
  and  falling  in  love  with  her  he  takes  away  her  magic  cloak,  and holds           
  her captive.                                                                                
        At last  he yields  to her  tears to  let her  free and  give her  back her           
  cloak,  but  he will  not aid  her because  of his  oath. Nor  does he  desire to           
  rescue   Felagund,   since   he   is   now   all-powerful  in   Nargothrond.  She           
  departs   from   Celegorm.   But   Huan   has   become   devoted   to   her,  and           
  goes with her.                                                                              
                                                                                             
  At  this  stage,  the hunting  evidently had  no significance  in itself:  it was           
  the  device  by  which  Huan  (already  in  Synopsis  I  the hound  of Celegorm,           
  and  with  a  peculiar  fate)  was  to  be  brought  to  accompany  Luthien, an           
  essential  feature  going  back  to  the  Tale  of Tinuviel.  There is  no mention           
  of her being hurt by  Huan, as  there is  in Synopsis  I (and  so no  question of           
  'redress');  and  here  Celegorm  falls in  love with  her and  therefore holds           
  her captive. But this  is only  for a  time; he  yields to  her prayer  and gives           
  her back her cloak,  though because  of his  oath he  will not  aid her;  and the           
  evil motive  of his  desiring to  let Felagund  perish so  that he  may retain           
  power   in   Nargothrond   appears.   Luthien   leaves   Celegorm;    Huan   goes           
  with  her,  as  in  Synopsis I,  but the  motive is  now explicitly  the hound's           
  love for her.                                                                                 
     After emendation the outline read as follows:                                            
                                                                                             
     Because  of  the  disguise  of  Felagund Thu  is suspicious  and his                     
  wolves fare far abroad. Celegorm seizes pretext for a wolfhunt.                             
     Curufin and Celegorm  go wolf-hunting  guilefully (really  to inter-                     
  cept Felagund*) with all their hounds. Huan the sleepless is the chief.                     
  (Huan came with him [i.e. Celegorm]  from Tavros'  halls.) He  is proof                     
  against magic sleep or death - it is his fate to be  slain only  by the                     
                                                                                             
  (* i.e., if he should return to Nargothrond; see lines 2330ff.)                              

  'greatest  wolf'.  They  espy  Luthien  who  flees,  but  is caught  by Huan
  whom   she  cannot   enchant.  The   hound  bears   her  to   Celegorm,  who
  learns  her  purpose.  Hearing who  she is,  and falling  in love  with her,
  Curufin  takes  away  her  magic  cloak,  and  holds  her  captive. Although
  she  tells  him  Melian's words  and that  Felagund and  Beren are  in Thu's
  power  he  won't  attempt  a  rescue  even  of  Felagund.   (Marginal  note:
  It is Curufin who put evil into Celegorm's heart.)                         
    In spite of her tears to let her free and give her back her cloak  he will
  not aid her  because of  his oath  and love.  Nor does  he desire  to rescue
  Felagund,  since  he  is  now  all-powerful  in  Nargothrond.  But  Huan has
  become  devoted  to  her,  and  aids  her  to  escape  without  her  cloak.
                                                                            
  The  hunting  of  Celegorm  and  Curufin  is now  given a  sinister import,
 and  is  related  to  the  wolves  of  Thu  who  'fare  far  abroad'. Huan's
 Valinorean  ancestry appears;  and Curufin  becomes the  evil genius  of the
 brothers, and also the lover  of Luthien.  Luthien is  now held  prisoner in
 Nargothrond until she escapes by  the aid  of Huan  - but  she does  not get
 back her cloak.                                                             
  Which of the brothers  is referred  to in  the latter  part of  the emended
 outline is not clear: as originally written it was Celegorm  throughout, but
 by the change of 'falling in love with her he takes away her magic cloak' to
 'failling  in  love  with  her Curufin  takes away  her magic  cloak' Curufin
 becomes  the  antecedent  to  all  that  follows.  Whether my  father really
 intended this is hard to say.                                               
                                                                            
  When he came to write Canto VIII, on the basis of this emended            
 outline, some further change took place - notably, the return to Luthien
 by Huan of her cloak before they left Nargothrond; and the element          
 added to the outline 'It is Curufin who put evil into Celegorm's heart' is
 expanded. It is now Curufin who suggests the wolfhunt, with its secret      
 intention, and line 2453 shows him as the subtler and more longheaded       
 schemer, standing behind his brother and prompting him - it is clear        
 from lines 2324ff. that Celegorm has some authority - or is felt by .        
 Curufin to have some authority - that Curufin lacks.                        
  Curufin expresses his contempt for Orodreth ('a dullard slow', 2321),      
 and this is the first hint of that weakening of Orodreth's character to     
 which I referred earlier (p. 91). Of course the emergence of Felagund       
 pushed him in any case into a subordinate role, as the younger brother of
 the founder of Nargothrond, and the concomitant development whereby         
 Celegorm and Curufin remained in Nargothrond as powerful interlopers        
 weakened his position still further. It may be that the position imposed
 on him by the movements in the legend led to the conclusion that he         
 cannot have been made of very stern stuff.                                  
  These subtleties in the relationship between Celegorm and Curufin          
 are passed over in the prose version (The Silmarillion pp. 172 - 3), and
 there is no suggestion that Curufin was the more sinister of the pair, and

 the prime  mover  in   their  machinations.   Celegorm  recovers   his  earlier
 role  as  the  one  who  was  enamoured  of  Luthien. In  the Lay  appears the
 motive,  not  mentioned  in  Synopsis  II,  of the  intention of  Celegorm and
 Curufin  to  ally  themselves  with  'King  Thingol's  blood'  by  the  forced
 marriage  of  Luthien  (lines 2498  -  2503);  and  this  reappears   in  The
 Silmarillion, where it is to Celegorm that Thingol is to be compelled to
 give her.                                                                      
                                                                               
 The  process   whereby  the   legends  of   Beren  and   Luthien  on   the  one
 hand  and  of  Nargothrond  on  the other  became entwined  is now  (to this
 point  in the  story) almost  complete, and  this is  a convenient  point to
 recapitulate the main shifts in its evolution.                                 
   In  the  Lost  Tales Orodreth  was  lord of  the Rodothlim,  a people  of the
 Gnomes,  in  the  caves  that  were  to  become  Nargothrond, but  Beren had
 no   connection   with   the  Rodothlim   (and  Huan   had  no   master).  Then
 Celegorm  appeared  as  the  Gnomish  prince   rescued  by   Beren's  father
 (Egnor  >  Barahir)  in  the  battle  that  afterwards  became  the  Battle  of
 Sudden  Flame, to  whom he  swore an  oath of  abiding friendship  and aid;
 and   Celegorm   and  Curufin   became  the   founders  of   Nargothrond  after
 the  battle  (p.  84).  It  was  to  Celegorm  that  Beren   therefore  came
 seeking aid; and  Celegorm plays  the later  role of  Felagund in  Synopsis I
 to  the  extent  that  he  gives  him Gnomish  guides. Luthien  fleeing from
 Doriath  is  caught  by  Huan,  now the  hound of  Celegorm, and  hurt, but
 this  has  no  outcome  beyond the  departure of  Luthien in  Huan's company
 (Synopsis I).                                                                  
   The  most  major  change  came  with  the  emergence  of  Felagund   and  his
 taking  over  Celegorm's  part  both as  founder of  Nargothrond and  as the
 one  rescued  by  Barahir.  Orodreth  became  his  younger  brother,  the  only
 other  son  of  Finrod  to survive  the battle  in which  the Siege  of Angband
 ended.   But   Celegorm's   association   with   Nargothrond   was   not  aban-
 doned; and  his powerful  presence there  together with  that of  his brother
 Curufin - again as a result of the battle - introduces the motive of conflict
 between  the Feanorians  and the  King, each  held by  their own  oaths. This
 conflict had been present in the earlier plot,  but there  it was  a conflict
 within Celegorm's  mind alone,  since he  had sworn  both oaths;  there is
 however  no  real  evidence as  to how  my father  would have  treated this,
 unless  we  assume  from  his  giving  Gnomish  guides to  Beren in  Synopsis I
 that he gave precedence to his oath to Barahir.                              
   When  Luthien  is  captured  by  Huan  and  taken   to  Nargothrond   she  is
 caught  up  in  the  ambitions  of  Celegorm  and   Curufin,  and   indeed  her
 capture itself  is made  to come  about from  their evil  intentions towards
 Felagund and determination to prevent his return.                            
                                                                               
       Of Huan it is told in the Lay that he was the only hound of Valinor to
     come east over the sea (2270). His fate that he should meet death only
     when 'he encountered the mightiest wolf that would ever walk the world'

                                                                                              
                                                                                              
  (The  Silmarillion  p.  173)  appears  (already  referred  to  in  Synopsis II,              
  pp. 245-6), but it  is not  said as  it is  in The Silmarillion that  this was              
  because  as  the   hound  of   Celegorm  he   came  under   the  Doom   of  the              
  Noldor. In the A-text of the Lay (note to  line 2551) he  spoke only  once in              
  his life, in the B-text twice; but this was emended to three times, as still in              
  The Silmarillion.                                                                           
                                                                                              
      The statement in lines 2248 - 50 that Orome                                              
                                                                                              
                          alone of Gods had loved the world                                    
                          before the banners were unfurled                                     
                          of Moon and Sun                                                      
                                                                                              
  seems to forget Yavanna: see the tale of The Chaining of Melko                               
  (I. 98 - 9) and The Silmarillion pp. 40 - 1.                                                
                                                                                              
      The   dim   cries   and   horns  blewing,   land  barking   hounds  through              
  the trees going (lines 2298- 9,  repeated with  variations in  lines 2348  - 9)              
  derive from the Middle English Lay of Sir Orfeo:                                             
                                                                                              
                             With dim cri & bloweing                                           
                               & houndes also wip him berking.*                                
                                                                                              
                                              IX.                                              
                                                                                              
                    In Wizard's Isle still lay forgot,                                         
                    enmeshed and tortured in that grot                                         
                    cold, evil, doorless, without light,                                       
                    and blank-eyed stared at endless night                                     
                    two comrades. Now alone they were.                                   2570
                    The others lived no more, but bare                                         
                    their broken bones would lie and tell                                      
                    how ten had served their master well.                                      
                                                                                              
                    To Felagund then Beren said:                                               
                    "Twere little loss if I were dead,                                   2575
                    and I am minded all to tell,                                               
                    and thus, perchance, from this dark hell                                   
                    thy life to loose. I set thee free                                         
                                                                                              
     (* Auchinleck manuscript lines 285-6 (ed. A. J. Bliss, Oxford 1954, p. 26); cf. my father's
  translation (Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl, and Sir Orfeo, 1975):                  
                                                                                              
                              with blowing far and crying dim                                  
                              and barking hounds that were with him.)                         

 from thine old oath, for more for me             
 hast thou endured than e'er was earned.'   2580
                                                 
 'A! Beren, Beren hast not learned                
 that promises of Morgoth's folk                  
 are frail as breath. From this dark yoke         
 of pain shall neither ever go,                   
 whether he learn our names or no,          2585
 with Thu's consent. Nay more, I think            
 yet deeper of torment we should drink,           
 knew he that son of Barahir                      
 and Felagund were captive here,                  
 and even worse if he should know           2590
 the dreadful errand we did go.'                  
                                                 
 A devil's laugh they ringing heard               
 within their pit. 'True, true the word           
 I hear you speak,' a voice then said.            
 "Twere little loss if he were dead,        2595
 the outlaw mortal. But the king,                 
 the Elf undying, many a thing                    
 no man could suffer may endure.                  
 Perchance, when what these walls immure         
 of dreadful anguish thy folk learn,        2600
 their king to ransom they will yearn             
 with gold and gem and high hearts cowed;         
 or maybe Celegorm the proud                      
 will deem a rival's prison cheap,                
 and crown and gold himself will keep.      2605
 Perchance, the errand I shall know,              
 ere all is done, that ye did go.                 
 The wolf is hungry, the hour is nigh;            
 no more need Beren wait to die.'                 
                                                 
 The slow time passed. Then in the gloom    2610
 two eyes there glowed. He saw his doom,          
 Beren, silent, as his bonds he strained          
 beyond his mortal might enchained.               
 Lo! sudden there was rending sound               
 of chains that parted and unwound,         2615
 of meshes broken. Forth there leaped             
 upon the wolvish thing that crept                
 in shadow faithful Felagund,                     

 careless of fang or venomed wound.                
 There in the dark they wrestled slow,        2620
 remorseless, snarling, to and fro,                
 teeth in flesh, gripe on throat,                  
 fingers locked in shaggy coat,                    
 spurning Beren who there lying                    
 heard the werewolf gasping, dying.           2625
 Then a voice he heard: 'Farewell!                 
 On earth I need no longer dwell,                  
 friend and comrade, Beren bold.                   
 My heart is burst, my limbs are cold.             
 Here all my power I have spent               2630
 to break my bonds, and dreadful rent              
 of poisoned teeth is in my breast.                
 I now must go to my long rest                     
 neath Timbrenting in timeless halls               
 where drink the Gods, where the light falls  2635
 upon the shining sea.' Thus died the king,        
 as elvish singers yet do sing.                    
                                                  
   There Beren lies. His grief no tear,            
 his despair no horror has nor fear,               
 waiting for footsteps, a voice, for doom.    2640
 Silences profounder than the tomb                 
 of long-forgotten kings, neath years              
 and sands uncounted laid on biers                 
 and buried everlasting-deep,                      
 slow and unbroken round him creep.            2645
                                                  
 The silences were sudden shivered                 
 to silver fragments. Faint there quivered         
 a voice in song that walls of rock,               
 enchanted hill, and bar and lock,                 
 and powers of darkness pierced with light.    2650
 He felt about him the soft night                  
 of many stars, and in the air                     
 were rustlings and a perfume rare;                
 the nightingales were in the trees,               
 slim fingers flute and viol seize              2655
 beneath the moon, and one more fair               
 than all there be or ever were                    
 upon a lonely knoll of stone                      
 in shimmering raiment danced alone.               

 Then in his dream it seemed he sang,        2660
 and loud and fierce his chanting rang,                 
 old songs of battle in the North,                      
 of breathless deeds, of marching forth                 
 to dare uncounted odds and break                       
 great powers, and towers, and strong walls shake; 2665
 and over all the silver fire                           
 that once Men named the Burning Briar,                 
 the Seven Stars that Varda set                         
                                                       
 about the North, were burning yet,                     
 a light in darkness, hope in woe,                 2670
 the emblem vast of Morgoth's foe.                      
                                                       
 'Huan, Huan! I hear a song                             
 far under welling, far but strong;                     
 a song that Beren bore aloft.                          
 I hear his voice, I have heard if oft             2675
 in dream and wandering.' Whispering low                
 thus Luthien spake. On the bridge of woe               
 in mantle wrapped at dead of night                     
 she sat and sang, and to its height                    
 and to its depth the Wizard*s Isle,               2680
 rock upon rock and pile on pile,                       
 trembling echoed. The werewolves howled,               
 and Huan hidden lay and growled                        
 watchful listening in the dark,                        
 waiting for battle cruel and stark.               2685
                                                       
 Thu heard that voice, and sudden stood                 
 wrapped in his cloak and sable hood                    
 in his high tower. He listened long,                   
 and smiled, and knew that elvish song.                 
 'A! little Luthien! What brought                  2690
 the foolish fly to web unsought?                        
 Morgoth! a great and rich reward                       
 to me thou wilt owe when to thy hoard                  
 this jewel is added.' Down he went,                    
 and forth his messengers he sent.                 2695
                                                       
  Still Luthien sang. A creeping shape                  
 with bloodred tongue and jaws agape                    
 stole on the bridge; but she sang on                   
 with trembling limbs and wide eyes wan.                

                               
                                                     
 The creeping shape leaped to her side,         2700
 and gasped, and sudden fell and died.                
 And still they came, still one by one,               
 and each was seized, and there were none             
 returned with padding feet to tell                   
 that a shadow lurketh fierce and fell           2705
 at the bridge's end, and that below                  
 the shuddering waters loathing flow                  
 o'er the grey corpses Huan killed.                   
 A mightier shadow slowly filled                      
 the narrow bridge, a slavering hate,           2710
 an awful werewolf fierce and great:                  
 pale Draugluin, the old grey lord                    
 of wolves and beasts of blood abhorred,              
 that fed on flesh of Man and Elf                     
 beneath the chair of Thu himself.              2715
                                                     
 No more in silence did they fight.                   
 Howling and baying smote the night,                  
 till back by the chair where he had fed              
 to die the werewolf yammering fled.                  
 'Huan is there' he gasped and died,            2720
 and Thu was filled with wrath and pride.             
 'Before the mightiest he shall fall,                 
 before the mightiest wolf of all',                   
 so thought he now, and thought he knew               
 how fate long spoken should come true.         2725
 Now there came slowly forth and glared               
 into the night a shape long-haired,                  
 dank with poison, with awful eyes                    
 wolvish, ravenous; but there lies                    
 a light therein more cruel and dread           2730
 than ever wolvish eyes had fed.                      
 More huge were its limbs, its jaws more wide,        
 its fangs more gleaming-sharp, and dyed              
 with venom, torment, and with death.                 
 The deadly vapour of its breath                2735 
 swept on before it. Swooning dies                    
 the song of Luthien, and her eyes                    
 are dimmed and darkened with a fear,                 
 cold and poisonous and drear.                        
                                                     
       Thus came Thu, as wolf more great         2740

 than e'er was seen from Angband's gate           
 to the burning south, than ever lurked           
 in mortal lands or murder worked.                
 Sudden he sprang, and Huan leaped                
 aside in shadow. On he swept                 2745
 to Luthien lying swooning faint.                 
 To her drowning senses came the taint            
 of his foul breathing, and she stirred;          
 dizzily she spake a whispered word,              
 her mantle brushed across his face.          2750
 He stumbled staggering in his pace.              
 Out leaped Huan. Back he sprang.                 
 Beneath the stars there shuddering rang          
 the cry of hunting wolves at bay,                
 the tongue of hounds that fearless slay.     2755
 Backward and forth they leaped and ran           
 feinting to flee, and round they span,           
 and bit and grappled, and fell and rose.         
 Then suddenly Huan holds and throws              
 his ghastly foe; his throat he rends,        2760
 choking his life. Not so it ends.                
 From shape to shape, from wolf to worm,          
 from monster to his own demon form,              
 Thu changes, but that desperate grip             
 he cannot shake, nor from it slip.           2765
 No wizardry, nor spell, nor dart,                
 no fang, nor venom, nor devil's art              
 could harm that hound that hart and boar         
 had hunted once in Valinor.                      
                                                 
   Nigh the foul spirit Morgoth made          2770
 and bred of evil shuddering strayed              
 from its dark house, when Luthien rose           
 and shivering looked upon his throes.            
                                                 
   '0 demon dark, 0 phantom vile                  
 of foulness wrought, of lies and guile,      2775
 here shalt thou die, thy spirit roam             
 quaking back to thy master's home                
 his scorn and fury to endure;                    
 thee he will in the bowels immure                
 of groaning earth, and in a hole             2780
 everlastingly thy naked soul                     

 shall wail and gibber - this shall be,              
 unless the keys thou render me                      
 of thy black fortress, and the spell                
 that bindeth stone to stone thou tell,          2785
 and speak the words of opening.'                    
                                                    
 With gasping breath and shuddering                  
 he spake, and yielded as he must,                   
 and vanquished betrayed his master's trust.         
                                                    
 Lo! by the bridge a gleam of light,             2790
 like stars descended from the night                 
 to burn and tremble here below.                     
 There wide her arms did Luthien throw,              
 and called aloud with voice as clear                
 as still at whiles may mortal hear              2795
 long elvish trumpets o'er the hill                  
 echo, when all the world is still.                  
 The dawn peered over mountains wan,                 
 their grey heads silent looked thereon.             
 The hill trembled; the citadel                  2800
 crumbled, and all its towers fell;                  
 the rocks yawned and the bridge broke,              
 and Sirion spumed in sudden smoke.                 
 Like ghosts the owls were flying seen               
 hooting in the dawn, and bats unclean           2805
 went skimming dark through the cold airs            
 shrieking thinly to find new lairs                  
 in Deadly Nightshade's branches dread.              
 The wolves whimpering and yammering fled            
 like dusky shadows. Out there creep             2810
 pale forms and ragged as from sleep,                
 crawling, and shielding blinded eyes:               
 the captives in fear and in surprise                
 from dolour long in clinging night                  
 beyond all hope set free to light.              2815
                                                    
 A vampire shape with pinions vast                   
 screeching leaped from the ground, and passed,      
 its dark blood dripping on the trees;               
 and Huan neath him lifeless sees                    
 a wolvish corpse - for Thu had flown            2820

                                                  
                                                    
 to Taur-na-Fuin, a new throne                       
 and darker stronghold there to build.               
 The captives came and wept and shrilled             
 their piteous cries of thanks and praise.           
 But Luthien anxious-gazing stays.               2825
 Beren comes not. At length she said:                
 'Huan, Huan, among the dead                         
 must we then find him whom we sought,               
 for love of whom we toiled and fought?'             
 Then side by side from stone to stone           2830
 o'er Sirion they climbed. Alone                     
 unmoving they him found, who mourned                
 by Felagund, and never turned                       
 to see what feet drew halting nigh.                 
 'A! Beren, Beren!'came her cry,                   2835
 'almost too late have I thee found?                 
 Alas! that here upon the ground                     
 the noblest of the noble race                       
 in vain thy anguish doth embrace!                   
 Alas! in tears that we should meet              2840
 who once found meeting passing sweet! '             
                                                    
   Her voice such love and longing filled            
 he raised his eyes, his mourning stilled,           
 and felt his heart new-turned to flame              
 for her that through peril to him came.         2845
                                                    
   'O Luthien, O Luthien,                            
 more fair than any child of Men,                    
 O loveliest maid of Elfinesse,                      
 what might of love did thee possess                 
 to bring thee here to terror's lair!            2850
 O lissom limbs and shadowy hair,                    
 O flower-entwined brows so white,                   
 O slender hands in this new light! '                
                                                    
   She found his arms and swooned away               
 just at the rising of the day.                  2855
                                                    
                       *                             

                              NOTES.                                       
                                                                          
   2637.    elfin B, not here emended, but it is clear that the intention
            was to change elfin to elvish (elven) in all cases.            
 2666-7.    Cf. lines 377 - 9 and note. In the present passage A's reading
            is as B.                                                       
   2699.    Line marked with an X on the B-text.                           
 2712 - 13. These lines (referring to Draugluin) not in A.                 
 2722-3.    Cf. lines 2293 - 4.                                            
   2755.    Line marked with an X on the B-text.                           
 2766-7.    Cf. lines 2288-9.                                              
      2769. After this line is written the date 'April 4th'. The previous
            date was 3 April 1928 at line 2423.                            
      2842. Cf. line 741.                                                  
 2854-5.    Cf. the ending of Canto III, lines 756 - 7.                  
                                                                          
                       Commentary on Canto IX.                             
                                                                          
 Synopsis I continues from the point reached on p. 244:                    
                                                                          
  Huan goes with  her. She  goes to  the castle  of the  Lord of  Wolves and
  sings for him. The captives in the dungeons hear her.                    
      It was written in the fate of Huan that he  could only  be slain  by a
  wolf.                                                                    
      She tells  (by arrangement)  of the  sickness of  Huan and  so induces
  the  Lord  of  Wolves  to  go  werewolf  and  seek  him.  The  wolf-battle
  of  the  glade.  The  'words  of opening'  wrung from  the Lord  of Wolves
  and the castle broken. Rescue of Beren.                                  
                                                                          
  Synopsis II is here less affected by later changes and can be given  in a
 single text (taking it up from the point reached on p. 246).              
                                                                          
  But  Huan  has  become  devoted  to her,  and aids  her to  escape without
  her  cloak.  [Bracketed:  He  trails Beren  and Felagund  to the  House of
  Thu.]                                                                    
      At  last only  Felagund and  Beren remain.  It is  Beren's turn  to be
  devoured.  But  Felagund  bursts  his  bonds and  wrestles with  the were-
  wolf and slays him, but is killed. Beren is reserved for torment.        
      Luthien  sings  outside the  house [added:  on the  bridge of  woe] of
  Thu  and  Beren  hears her  voice, and  his answering  song comes  up from
  underground to Huan's ears.                                              
      Thu takes her inside. She tells him a twisted tale - by the  desire of
  Huan,  and  because  without  her  cloak  she  cannot  enchant   him.  She
  tells of  her bondage  to Celegorm  and her  capture by  Huan of  whom she
  feigns  hatred.  Of  all  things  in the  world Thu  hates Huan  most. His
  weird  to be  slain only  by the  'greatest wolf'  is known.  Luthien says
  Huan  is  lying  sick  in  the woods.  Thu disguises  himself as  a mighty

  werewolf  and  is  led  by  her  to  where  Huan is  lying in  ambush. [Added:
  But he purposes to make her a thrall.]                                        
     There  follows  the  battle  of  the  werewolf.   Huan  slays   Thu's  com-
  panions and with his  teeth in  Thu's throat  wrests in  return for  life 'the
  words  of  opening'  from  him.  The  house   of  Thu   is  broken,   and  the
  captives  set  free.  Beren  is  found   [struck  out:   and  borne   back  to
  Nargothrond.]                                                                 
                                                                               
  There is also to be considered now another outline, 'Synopsis III',           
  very hastily written and not entirely legible. This outline begins here and
 I follow it to the end of the narrative in this Canto.                         
                                                                               
  Thu  lies  choking  under  Huan.  Luthien  arouses.   She  says   'thou  phan-
  tom  made  of  foulness  by Morgoth,  thou shalt  die and  thy spirit  go back
  in  fear  to  Angband  to meet  thy master's  scorn and  languish in  the dark
  bosom  of  the  world,  if  the  "spoken  keys"  of   thy  fortress   are  not
  yielded.'                                                                     
     With  his  gasping   breath  he   says  them.   Luthien  standing   on  the
  bridge  with  her  arms  spread  calls  them  aloud.   The  dawn   comes  pale
  over  the  mountains.  The  hill  quivers  and  gapes,  the  towers  fall, the
  bridge  falls  and   block[s]  Sirion   on  one   side,  the   dungeons  gape.
  The owls  flee away  like phantoms  in the  first light,  great bats  are seen
  skimming   away   to   Taur-na-Fuin   shrieking   thinly.   [Added:   and  one
  as  large  as  an  eagle  leads  them.  The  spirit  of  Thu.  His   body  has
  a    ............    a    wolf.]    The    wolves    flee    whimpering    and
  yammering.  Pale  captives  blinking  in the  light creep  and crawl  into the
  light.  [Struck  out:  Beren  comes  forth.]  No  Beren.  They  seek  for  him
  and find him sitting beside Felagund.                                         
                                                                               
  These  outlines  are  of  great  interest,  since  they  show very  clearly an
 intermediate  stage  in  the  evolution  of  the  legend, between  the original
 story  of Tevildo  Prince of  Cats in  the Tale  of Tinuviel  and the  story of
 Thu  in  the  Lay  of  Leithian. Still  present is  Luthien's untrue  tale that
    Huan is lying sick in the woods (see II. 26), and in Synopsis II Thu     
   retains the (originally feline) Tevildo-trait of hating Huan more than any
       other creature in the world (II. 21). The old element of Tinuviel's      
  entering the castle alone in order to inveigle Tevildo out of it, so that he
       may be attacked by Huan, was not yet abandoned - but in Synopsis II      
 she  does  not  have  her  cloak,  and so  cannot enchant  Thu, whereas  in the
 Tale  the  drowsiness  which  came  upon  the   doorkeeper  cat   Umuiyan,  and
 afterwards  on  Tevildo  himself,  is ascribed  to her  'robe of  sable mist'
 ( II. 24 - 5). In the Lay, as in the account in The Silmarillion based  on the
 Lay,  Luthien's  sleep-bearing  cloak  has  come  back into  the story  at this
 juncture,  since  Huan  retrieved  it  before  they  left Nargothrond,  and she
 used it against Thu in the battle on the bridge.                               
  A  new  element  enters  in  Synopsis  I  with the  singing of  Luthien before
 Thu,  and  the  captives  in  the  dungeons  hearing  her;  in  the   old  Tale

  Tinuviel  merely  spoke  very  loudly  so that  Beren might  hear her  in the
  kitchen where he  toiled. In  Synopsis II  this element  is developed  to the
  final  form,  with  Luthien  singing on  the bridge  leading to  the Wizard's
  Isle;  but she  still enters  the castle  by herself,  before 'the  battle of
  the werewolf'.                                                               
    The  sentence  added  in Synopsis  I I  saying that  Thu 'purposes  to make
  her a thrall' goes back to the Tale (II. 26), and survived into the  Lay and
  The  Silmarillion  ('he  thought to  make her  captive and  hand her  over to
  the power of Morgoth, for his reward would be great').                       
    The  statement  in  II  that  'Huan   slays  Thu's   companions'  doubtless
  proceeds from  the story  in the  Tale, where  when Tevildo  set out  to find
  Huan he  was accompanied  by two  of his  'thanes', though  in the  Tale only
  Oikeroi was slain by Huan, and the  other (unnamed)  cat fled  up a  tree, as
  also did Tevildo himself (II. 28). In II, and in more detail in III, Thu is
  at  Huan's  mercy  on the  ground. In  neither I  nor II  (III only  takes up
  after this point) is there any suggestion of the wolves  coming out  from the
  castle  and  being  slain  by Huan  one by  one and  silently, until  at last
  Draugluin  came  forth;  but  as  I  noted  in  my  commentary  on  the  Tale
  (II. 54 - 5) 'the killing of the cat Oikeroi is the germ of Huan's fight with
  Draugluin  - the  skin of  Huan's dead  opponent is  put to  the same  use in
  either  case'.  This element  of the  procession of  wolves before  Thu comes
  only  enters  with  the poem.  The verses  naming Draugluin  as the  last and
  greatest of them (2712  - 13)  are not  in A,  but in  Luthien's 'lengthening
  spell'  Draugluin  the  werewolf  pale  is named  in B  (1489), where  A has
  Carcharas.                                                                   
    Most interesting of all the features of this part of the  story is  that of
  the  'words  of  opening'  or  'spoken  keys',  which goes  back to  the Tale
  (II.  28  - g).  I have  discussed there  (II. 55)  the implications  of this
  element  in the  enlarged context  (the fortress  of Thu  had been  an Elvish
  watchtower):  the  consequent  'displacement'  of  the  spell  that  held the
  stones together.                                                             
    In Synopsis III appear other  features of  the final  story: the  flight of
  Thu  as  a  great  bat;  the  finding  of  Beren  sitting  beside   the  body
  of  Felagund.  The  pale  captives  who  creep  blinking  into  the  light go
  back ultimately to the host  of cats,  reduced by  the breaking  of Tevildo's
  spell  to  puny  size,  who  came  forth   from  the   castle  in   the  Tale
                                                                              
  (II. 29, 55).                                                                
    In  Canto  IX the  story reaches  its final  form, and  the passage  in The
  Silmarillion  derives  from  it closely,  with only  minor differences  - the
  chief  being  the  omission of  all mention  of Thu's  voice in  the dungeon,
  which is only found in the poem (lines 2592  - 2609).  The old  element still
  present in Synopsis  II of  Luthien entering  the castle  alone has  at last
  disappeared.                                                                 
                                                                              
    There  remain  a  few  matters of  interest apart  from the  development of
  the story. Felagund's dying words (2633 - 6):                                

                 I now must go to my long rest                                             
                 neath Timbrenting in timeless halls                                       
                 where drink the Gods, where the light falls                               
                 upon the shining sea                                                      
                                                                                          
  are closely similar to Turin's words of parting to Beleg dead (p. 58,                    
  1408-11):                                                                               
                                                                                          
                 Now fare well, Beleg, to feasting long                                    
                 neath Tengwethil in the timeless halls                                    
                 where drink the Gods, neath domes golden                                  
                 o'er the sea shining.                                                     
                                                                                          
  As I have said (p. 94), Turin foresees for Beleg an afterlife in Valinor, in             
  the  halls  of  the  Gods,  and  does not  speak, as  does Beleg  himself in             
 - Turin's dream, of a time of 'waiting':                                                  
                                                                                          
                               my life has winged to the long waiting                      
                        in the halls of the Moon o'er the hills of the sea.                
                                                                                          
                                                                        (P. 55, 1696 - 7)
                                                                                          
     Very notable are the  words about  Thu: 'the  foul spirit  Morgoth made'              
  (line 2770).                                                                            
                                                                                          
                   In the passage (2666 - 71) referring to the constellation of the Great
               Bear is the first suggestion of the idea that Varda set the Seven Stars in
                   -, the sky as an emblem of hope against Morgoth. Cf. The Silmarillion
 (P. 174):                                                                               
                                                                                          
     [Beren]  sang  a  song  of  challenge  that  he  had made  in praise  of the          
     Seven  Stars,  the  Sickle  of  the Valar  that Varda  hung above  the North          
     as a sign for the fall of Morgoth.                                                    
                                                                                          
                                                X.                                         
                                                                                          
               Songs have recalled the Elves have sung                                     
               in old forgotten elven tongue-                                              
               how Luthien and Beren strayed                                               
               by the banks of Sirion. Many a glade                                        
               they filled with joy, and there their feet                            2860
               passed by lightly, and days were sweet.                                     
               Though winter hunted through the wood,                                      
               still flowers lingered where she stood.                                     
               Tinuviel! Tinuviel!                                                         
               the birds are unafraid to dwell                                       2865

 and sing beneath the peaks of snow                
 where Beren and where Luthien go.                 
                                                  
 The isle in Sirion they left behind;              
 but there on hill-top might one find              
 a green grave, and a stone set,               2870
 and there there lie the white bones yet           
 of Felagund, of Finrod's son -                    
 unless that land is changed and gone,             
 or foundered in unfathomed seas,                  
 while Felagund laughs beneath the trees       2875
 in Valinor, and comes no more                     
 to this grey world of tears and war.              
                                                  
 To Nargothrond no more he came;                   
 but thither swiftly ran the fame                  
 of their king dead, of Thu o'erthrown,        2880
 of the breaking of the towers of stone.           
 For many now came home at last,                   
 who long ago to shadow passed;                    
 and like a shadow had returned                    
 Huan the hound, and scant had earned          2885
 or praise or thanks of master wroth;              
 yet loyal he was, though he was loath.            
 The halls of Narog clamours fill                  
 that vainly Celegorm would still.                 
 There men bewailed their fallen king,         2890
 crying that a maiden dared that thing             
 which sons of Feanor would not do.                
 'Let us slay these faithless lords untrue!'      
 the flickle folk now loudly cried                 
 with Felagund who would not ride.             2895
 Orodreth spake: 'The kingdom now                  
 is mine alone. I will allow                       
 no spilling of kindred blood by kin.              
 But bread nor rest shall find herein              
 these brothers who have set at nought         2900
 the house of Finrod.' They were brought.          
 Scornful, unbowed, and unashamed                  
 stood Celegorm. In his eye there flamed           
 a light of menace. Curufin                        
 smiled with his crafty mouth and thin.        2905

 'Be gone for ever - ere the day                   
 shall fall into the sea. Your way                 
 shall never lead you hither more,                 
 nor any son of Feanor;                            
 nor ever after shall be bond                2910
 of love twixt yours and Nargothrond.'             
                                                  
   'We will remember it,' they said,               
 and turned upon their heels, and sped,            
 and took their horses and such folk               
 as still them followed. Nought they spoke   29 I 5
 but sounded horns, and rode like fire,            
 and went away in anger dire.                      
                                                  
 Towards Doriath the wanderers now                 
 were drawing nigh. Though bare the bough,         
 though cold the wind, and grey the grasses  2920
 through which the hiss of winter passes,          
 they sang beneath the frosty sky                  
 uplifted o'er them pale and high.                 
 They came to Mindeb's narrow stream               
 that from the hills doth leap and gleam     2925
 by western borders where begin                    
 the spells of Melian to fence in                  
 King Thingol's land, and stranger steps           
 to wind bewildered in their webs.                 
                                                  
 There sudden sad grew Beren's heart:        2930
 'Alas, Tinuviel, here we part                     
 and our brief song together ends,                 
 and sundered ways each lonely wends!'            
                                                  
   'Why part we here? What dost thou say,          
 just at the dawn of brighter day? '         2935
                                                  
 'For safe thou'rt come to borderlands             
 o'er which in the keeping of the hands            
 of Melian thou wilt walk at ease                  
 and find thy home and well-loved trees.'          
                                                  
 'My heart is glad when the fair trees       2940
 far off uprising grey it sees                     
 of Doriath inviolate.                             
 Yet Doriath my heart did hate,                    
 and Doriath my feet forsook,                      

 my home, my kin. I would not look          2945
 on grass nor leaf there evermore               
 without thee by me. Dark the shore             
 of Esgalduin the deep and strong!              
 Why there alone forsaking song                 
 by endless waters rolling past             2950
 must I then hopeless sit at last,              
 and gaze at waters pitiless                    
 in heartache and in loneliness?'               
                                               
 'For never more to Doriath                     
 can Beren find the winding path,           2955
 though Thingol willed it or allowed;           
 for to thy father there I vowed                
 to come not back save to fulfill               
 the quest of the shining Silmaril,             
 and win by valour my desire.               2960
 "Not rock nor steel nor Morgoth's fire         
 nor all the power of Elfinesse,                
 shall keep the gem I would possess":           
 thus swore I once of Luthien                   
 more fair than any child of Men.           2965
 My word, alas! I must achieve,                 
 though sorrow pierce and parting grieve.'      
                                               
   'Then Luthien will not go home,              
 but weeping in the woods will roam,            
 nor peril heed, nor laughter know.         2970
 And if she may not by thee go                  
 against thy will thy desperate feet            
 she will pursue, until they meet,              
 Beren and Luthien, love once more              
 on earth or on the shadowy shore.'         2975
                                               
   'Nay, Luthien, most brave of heart,          
 thou makest it more hard to part.              
 Thy love me drew from bondage drear,           
 but never to that outer fear,                  
 that darkest mansion of all dread,         2980
 shall thy most blissful light be led.'         
                                               
 'Never, never! ' he shuddering said.           
 But even as in his arms she pled,              
 a sound came like a hurrying storm.            

            
                                                 
 There Curufin and Celegorm                   2985
 in sudden tumult like the wind                   
 rode up. The hooves of horses dinned             
 loud on the earth. In rage and haste             
 madly northward they now raced                   
 the path twixt Doriath to find               2990
 and the shadows dreadly dark entwined            
 of Taur-na-Fuin. That was their road             
 most swift to where their kin abode              
 in the east, where Himling's watchful hill       
 o'er Aglon's gorge hung tall and still.      2995
                                                 
 They saw the wanderers. With a shout             
 straight on them swung their hurrying rout,      
 as if neath maddened hooves to rend              
 the lovers and their love to end.                
 But as they came the horses swerved          3000
 with nostrils wide and proud necks curved;       
 Curufin, stooping, to saddlebow                  
 with mighty arm did Luthien throw,               
 and laughed. Too soon; for there a spring        
 fiercer than tawny lion-king                 3005
 maddened with arrows barbed smart,               
 greater than any horned hart                     
 that hounded to a gulf leaps o'er,               
 there Beren gave, and with a roar                
 leaped on Curufin; round his neck            3010
 his arms entwined, and all to wreck              
 both horse and rider fell to ground;             
 and there they fought without a sound.           
 Dazed in the grass did Luthien lie               
 beneath bare branches and the sky;           3015
 the Gnome felt Beren's fingers grim              
 close on his throat and strangle him,            
 and out his eyes did start, and tongue           
 gasping from his mouth there hung.               
 Up rode Celegorm with his spear,             3020
 and bitter death was Beren near.                 
 With elvish steel he nigh was slain              
 whom Luthien won from hopeless chain,            
 but baying Huan sudden sprang                    
 before his master's face with fang           3025

 white-gleaming, and with bristling hair,           
 as if he on boar or wolf did stare.                
   The horse in terror leaped aside,                
 and Celegorm in anger cried:                       
 'Curse thee, thou base born dog, to dare          3030
 against thy master teeth to bare! '                
 But dog nor horse nor rider bold                   
 would venture near the anger cold                  
 of mighty Huan fierce at bay.                      
 Red were his jaws. They shrank away,         3035
 and fearful eyed him from afar:                    
 nor sword nor knife, nor scimitar,                 
 no dart of bow, nor cast of spear,                 
 master nor man did Huan fear.                      
                                                   
   There Curufin had left his life,           3040
 had Luthien not stayed that strife.                
 Waking she rose and softly cried                   
 standing distressed at Beren's side:               
 'Forbear thy anger now, my lord!                   
 nor do the work of Orcs abhorred;            3045
 for foes there be of Elfinesse                     
 unnumbered, and they grow not less,                
 while here we war by ancient curse                
 distraught, and all the world to worse             
 decays and crumbles. Make thy peace! '       3050
                                                   
 Then Beren did Curufin release;                    
 but took his horse and coat of mail,               
 and took his knife there gleaming pale,            
 hanging sheathless, wrought of steel.              
 No flesh could leeches ever heal              3055
 that point had pierced; for long ago               
 the dwarves had made it, singing slow              
 enchantments, where their hammers fell             
 in Nogrod ringing like a bell.                     
 Iron as tender wood it cleft,                3060
 and sundered mail like woollen weft.               
 But other hands its haft now held;                 
 its master lay by mortal felled.                   
 Beren uplifting him, far him flung,                
 and cried 'Begone! ', with stinging tongue;  3065
 'Begone! thou renegade and fool,                   

 and let thy lust in exile cool!                   
 Arise and go, and no more work                    
 like Morgoth's slaves or cursed Orc;              
 and deal, proud son of Feanor,              3070
 in deeds more proud than heretofore! '            
 Then Beren led Luthien away,                      
 while Huan still there stood at bay.              
                                                  
 'Farewell,' cried Celegorm the fair.              
 'Far get you gone! And better were          3075
 to die forhungered in the waste                   
 than wrath of Feanor's sons to taste,             
 that yet may reach o'er dale and hill.            
 No gem, nor maid, nor Silmaril                    
 shall ever long in thy grasp lie!           3080
 We curse thee under cloud and sky,                
 we curse thee from rising unto sleep!             
 Farewell! ' He swift from horse did leap,         
 his brother lifted from the ground;               
 then bow of yew with gold wire bound        3085
 he strung, and shaft he shooting sent,            
 as heedless hand in hand they went;               
 a dwarvish dart and cruelly hooked.               
 They never turned nor backward looked.            
 Loud bayed Huan, and leaping caught         3090
 the speeding arrow. Quick as thought              
 another followed deadly singing;                  
 but Beren had turned, and sudden springing        
 defended Luthien with his breast.                 
 Deep sank the dart in flesh to rest.        3095
 He fell to earth. They rode away,                 
 and laughing left him as he lay;                  
 yet spurred like wind in fear and dread           
 of 'Huan's pursuing anger red.                    
 Though Curufin with bruised mouth laughed,  3100
 yet later of that dastard shaft                   
 was tale and rumour in the North,                 
 and Men remembered at the Marching Forth,         
 and Morgoth's will its hatred helped.             
                                                  
 Thereafter   never   hound    was   whelped  3105
 would     follow    horn     of    Celegorm       
 or  Curufin.  Though  in strife  and storm,       

 though all their house in ruin red             
 went down, thereafter laid his head            
 Huan no more at that lord's feet,          3110
 but followed Luthien, brave and fleet.         
 Now sank she weeping at the side               
 of Beren, and sought to stem the tide          
 of welling blood that flowed there fast.       
 The raiment from his breast she cast;      3115
 from shoulder plucked the arrow keen;          
 his wound with tears she washed it clean.      
   Then Huan came and bore a leaf,              
 of all the herbs of healing chief,             
 that evergreen in woodland glade           3120
 there grew with broad and hoary blade.         
 The powers of all grasses Huan knew,           
 who wide did forest-paths pursue.              
 Therewith the smart he swift allayed,          
 while Luthien murmuring in the shade       3125
 the staunching song, that Elvish wives         
 long years had sung in those sad lives         
 of war and weapons, wove o'er him.             
                                               
 The shadows fell from mountains grim.          
 Then sprang about the darkened North       3130
 the Sickle of the Gods, and forth              
 each star there stared in stony night          
 radiant, glistering cold and white.            
 But on the ground there is a glow,             
 a spark of red that leaps below:           3135
 under woven boughs beside a fire               
 of crackling wood and sputtering briar         
 there Beren lies in drowsing deep,             
 walking and wandering in sleep.                
 Watchful bending o'er him wakes            3140
 a maiden fair; his thirst she slakes,          
 his brow caresses, and softly croons           
 a song more potent than in runes               
 or leeches' lore hath since been writ.         
 Slowly the nightly watches flit.           3145
 The misty morning crawleth grey                
 from dusk to the reluctant day.                
                                               
      Then Beren woke and opened eyes,          

 and rose and cried: 'Neath other skies,              
 in lands more awful and unknown,                 3150
 I wandered long, methought, alone                    
 to the deep shadow where the dead dwell;             
 but ever a voice that I knew well,                   
 like bells, like viols, like harps, like birds,      
 like music moving without words,                 3155
 called me, called me through the night,              
 enchanted drew me back to light!                     
 Healed the wound, assuaged the pain!                 
 Now are we come to morn again,                       
 new journeys once more lead us on -              3160
 to perils whence may life be won,                    
 hardly for Beren; and for thee                       
 a waiting in the wood I see,                         
 beneath the trees of Doriath,                        
 while ever follow down my path                   3165
 the echoes of thine elvish song,                     
 where hills are haggard and roads are long.'         
                                                     
 'Nay, now no more we have for foe                    
 dark Morgoth only, but in woe,                       
 in wars and feuds of Elfinesse                   3170
 thy quest is bound; and death, no less,              
 for thee and me, for Huan bold                       
 the end of weird of yore foretold,                   
 all this I bode shall follow swift,                  
 if thou go on. Thy hand shall lift               3175
 and lay in Thingol's lap the dire                    
 and flaming jewel, Feanor's fire,                    
 never, never! A why then go?                         
 Why turn we not from fear and woe                    
 beneath the trees to walk and roam               3180
 roofless, with all the world as home,                
 over mountains, beside the seas,                     
 in the sunlight, in the breeze?'                     
                                                     
 Thus long they spoke with heavy hearts;              
 and yet not all her elvish arts,                 3185
 nor lissom arms, nor shining eyes                    
 as tremulous stars in rainy skies,                   
 nor tender lips, enchanted voice,                    
 his purpose bent or swayed his choice.               

 Never to Doriath would he fare                 3190
 save guarded fast to leave her there;              
 never to Nargothrond would go                      
 with her, lest there came war and woe;             
 and never would in the world untrod                
 to wander suffer her, worn, unshod,            3195
 roofless and restless, whom he drew                
 with love from the hidden realms she knew.         
 'For Morgoth's power is now awake;                 
 already hill and dale doth shake,                  
 the hunt is up, the prey is wild:              3200
 a maiden lost, an elven child.                     
 Now Orcs and phantoms prowl and peer               
 from tree to tree, and fill with fear              
 each shade and hollow. Thee they seek!             
 At thought thereof my hope grows weak,         3205
 my heart is chilled. I curse mine oath,            
 I curse the fate that joined us both               
 and snared thy feet in my sad doom                 
 of flight and wandering in the gloom!              
 Now let us haste, and ere the day              3210
 be fallen, take our swiftest way,                  
 till o'er the marches of thy land                  
 beneath the beech and oak we stand                 
 in Doriath, fair Doriath                           
 whither no evil finds the path,                3215
 powerless to pass the listening leaves             
 that droop upon those forest-eaves.'               
                                                   
   Then to his will she seeming bent.               
 Swiftly to Doriath they went,                      
 and crossed its borders. There they stayed     3220
 resting in deep and mossy glade;                   
 there lay they sheltered from the wind             
 under mighty beeches silken-skinned,               
 and sang of love that still shall be,              
 though earth be foundered under sea,           3225
 and sundered here for evermore                     
 shall meet upon the Western Shore.                 
                                                   
   One  morning  as asleep  she lay                 
 upon the moss,  as though  the day                 
 too bitter were for gentle flower              3230

            to open in a sunless hour,                                      
            Beren arose and kissed her hair,                                
            and wept, and softly left her there.                            
            'Good Huan,' said he, 'guard her well!                          
            In leafless field no asphodel,                            3235
            in thorny thicket never a rose                                  
            forlorn, so frail and fragrant blows.                           
            Guard her from wind and frost, and hide                         
            from hands that seize and cast aside;                           
            keep her from wandering and woe,                          3240
            for pride and fate now make me go.'                             
                                                                           
                The horse he took and rode away,                            
            nor dared to turn; but all that day                             
            with heart as stone he hastened forth                           
            and took the paths toward the North.                     3245
                                                                           
                                  NOTES.                                    
                                                                           
   2877.    Against this line is written the date 'April 5th'. The previous
            date was 4 April 1928 at line 2769.                            
   2929.    At the end of this line is written the date 'April 6th'.        
 2980-3.    Cf. lines 649 - 52, 1220 - 3.                                   
   2998.    Against this line is written the date 'April 27th 1928'.        
   3031.    Before this line is written the date 'Nov. 1929'. This date may
            refer  forward  or  backward;  but  both it  and the  text that
            follows is written with a slightly finer nib than that used for
            the preceding portion  of the  poem. The  previous date  was 27
            April 1928 at line 2998.                                        
  3076-84.  Against these seven lines, as first written in the margin of the
            manuscript A, is the date 'Sept. 1930'.                         
  3119.     Against this line my father wrote in the  margin of  the B-text
            the  word  athelas.  In  The  Fellowship  of  the Ring  (I. 12)
            Aragorn  said  that  it  was  brought  to  Middle-earth  by the
            Numenoreans.                                                    
  3220.     After  the  word  borders  is  written  the date  '25 September
                                                                           
            1930'.                                                          
 3242-5.    These last four lines of the Canto are only found  in A,  but I
            suspect that they were omitted inadvertently.                   

                             Commentary on Canto X.                          
                                                                            
 The development of the  story in  this Canto  can again  be followed  step by
 step  in  the  outlines.  In  the Tale  of Tinuviel  (II. 3o  - x)  Beren and
 Tinuviel  wandered  away  with  Huan  after  the  defeat  of Tevildo,  and it
 was her desire  to return  to Artanor  but unwillingness  to part  from Beren
 that led to their resolve to try to gain a Silmaril. The catskin  of Oikeroi,
 thane  of  Tevildo,  was  carried by  Huan as  a trophy,  and they  begged it
 from  him;  it  was  in  the  guise  of  a  cat that  Beren went  to Angband.
 Synopsis I says no  more of  this part  of the  narrative than  'Tinuviel and
 Beren  disguised  as  a  werewolf  go to  Angband', and  apart from  the fact
 that the skin was that of  a werewolf  and not  of a  cat there  had probably
 been no development from the Tale.                                          
  Synopsis  II  continues  from  the  point  reached  on  p.  257  as follows:
                                                                            
     Luthien  tends  Beren  in  the  wood.  Huan  brings news  to Nargothrond.
  The  Gnomes  drive  forth  Curufin  and  Celegorm,  grieving  for  Felagund,
  and  send  the  cloak back  to Luthien.  Luthien takes  her cloak  again and
  led  by  Huan  they  go  to  Angband.  By  his guidance  and her  magic they
  escape  capture.  Huan  dare  not come  any further.  Beren is  disguised as
  a werewolf. They enter Angband.                                            
                                                                            
 The  sentences  'and  send  the  cloak  back  to  Luthien. Luthien  takes her
 cloak  again'  were changed  at the  time of  writing to  read: 'and  send to
 succour  Beren  and  Luthien.  Huan  brings  Luthien  back her  cloak again.'
 (This  outline  was  written  of  course  before  my  father   reached  Canto
 VIII,  at  the  end  of  which  Huan  brought  Luthien  her cloak  before she
 escaped from Nargothrond.)                                                  
  Here  Synopsis  11  ends.  At  the  bottom  of  the  page  is  written  very
 roughly:                                                                    
                                                                            
            Celegorm's embassy to Thingol so that Thingol knows or thinks he
  knows Beren dead and Luthien in Nargothrond.                               
    Why Celegorm and Curufin hated by Thingol ..                             
    The loss of Dairon.                                                      
                                                                            
  While  the   expulsion  of   Celegorm  and   Curufin  from   Nargothrond  is
 now first mentioned, it is clear that the story of their attack on  Beren and
 Luthien  did  not  exist.  Huan  brings the  news of  the destruction  of the
 Wizard's  Tower,  but  it  seems  that  he  does  not leave  Nargothrond with
 Celegorm and brings back the cloak to Luthien independently.                
  Synopsis  III  has been  given on  p. 257  to the  point where  Luthien and
 Huan find Beren 'sitting beside Felagund'. I  give the  next portion  of this
 outline as it was first written:                                            
                                                                            
     They  hallow  the  isle  and bury  Felagund on  its top,  and no  wolf or
  evil  creature will  ever come  there again.  Beren is  led into  the woods.
  [The   following   sentence   was   bracketed   with  a   marginal  direc-
  tion  that  it  should  come  later:  Morgoth  hearing  of  the  breaking of

                                                                            
                                                                            
 the  Wizard's  Tower  sends  out  an army  of Orcs;  finding the  wolves are
 slain with...... throats he thinks it  is Huan  and fashions  a vast  wolf -
 Carcharas - mightiest of all wolves to guard his door.]                     
   They hide in  Taur-na-Fuin careful  not to  lose sight  of light  at edge.
 Luthien  bids  Beren  desist.  He  cannot,  he  says,  return   to  Doriath.
 Then, she says,  she will  live in  the woods  with Beren  and Huan.  But he
 has  spoken  his  word;  he  has  vowed  not to  fear Morgoth...  hell. Then
 she says [that she] fears that  their lives  will all  be forfeit.  But life
 perchance  lies  after  death.  Where Beren  goes she  goes. This  gives him
 pause.  They  ask  Huan.  He  speaks  for  second  and  last time.  'No more
 may Huan go with you - what you see at  the gate,  he will  see later  - his
 fate  does  not  lead  to  Angband.  Perchance,  though  his  eyes  are dim,
 [?thy]  paths  lead  out of  it again.'  He goes  to Nargothrond.  They will
 not return to Nargothrond with him.                                         
   Luthien  and  Beren  leave  Taur-na-Fuin  and  wander  about   together  a
 while.  Longing  to  look  on  Doriath seizes  her and  Beren thinks  of the
 quest  unaccomplished.  Beren  offers  to  lead  her   to  the   borders  of
 Doriath, but they cannot bear to part.                                      
   They  go  to  the  Wizard's  Isle and  take a  'wolf-ham' and  a bat-robe.
 Thus  they  trembling  inwardly  set  forth.  The  journey  to  Angband over
 Dor-na-Fauglith and into the dark ravines of the hills.                     
                                                                            
 Here first appears the burial of  Felagund on  the summit  of the  isle, and
 its hallowing.  This outline  makes no  mention of  the events  in Nargo-
 thrond, and concentrates exclusively on Beren and Luthien. They are in
 Taur-na-Fuin, and Huan is with them; and we have the first version of       
 Huan's  counsel  to  them, and  his foreseeing  that what  they meet  at the
 Gate of Angband he will himself see later. Since the attack by Celegorm
 and Curufin had still not been devised, the story is briefer than it was to
 become; thus Huan speaks to them in Taur-na-Fuin soon after the       
 destruction of the Wizard's Tower, and then departs to Nargothrond,       
 while they after a while go to the Isle and take the 'wolf-ham' ('wolf-hame'
 in  The  Silmarillion  p.  178,  Old  English  hama)  and  'bat-robe', which
 now  first  appear  (though  the  'wolf-hame'  derives  from the  catskin of
 Oikeroi  in  the  Tale).  From  the words  'They will  not return  to Nargo-
 thrond with him' and from the fact that as the outline was written he is
 not mentioned again, it is clear that Huan was now out of the story (until
 his reappearance in a later episode). His speech is here called 'the second
 and last time' that he spoke with words. Afterwards the story was
 changed in this point, for he spoke to Beren a third time at his death (see
 note to line 2551).
  Pencilled changes were made to this passage of Synopsis III, and these
 move the narrative a long way to the final version:
                                                                            
         They hallow the isle and bury Felagund on its top, and no wolf or
 evil creature will ever come there again.                                   
    Luthien  and  Beren  leave  Taur-na-Fuin  and  wander  about  together a

 while.  Longing  to  look  on  Doriath  seizes  her and  Beren thinks  of the
 quest  unaccomplished.  Beren  offers  to   lead  her   to  the   borders  of
 Doriath, but they cannot bear to part.                                       
   News   by   captives  and   Huan  is   brought  to   Nargothrond.  Celegorm
 and  Curufin  in  a  revulsion  of  feeling the  Nargothronders wish  to slay
 them.  Orodreth  will  not.  They   are  exiled   and  all   Feanorians  from
 Nargothrond  for  ever.  They  ride  off.  Assault  of  Celegorm  and Curufin
 in  wood  on  Beren  and  Luthien.  Rescue  by  Huan.  Beren   wrestles  with
 Curufin and gets his magic knife - [eight further words illegible]           
   Huan   brings   them  a   wolf-ham.  Thus   they  trembling   inwardly  set
 forth.  Huan  speaks  for  last  time and  says farewell.  He will  not come.
 The journey to Angband, &c.                                                  
                                                                             
 Here  more  is  told  of  the   expulsion  of   Celegorm  and   Curufin  from
 Nargothrond,  and  Orodreth's refusal  to allow  them to  be slain,  and here
 at last is mention - probably written here at the very time of its devising -
 of  the  attack  on   Beren  and   Luthien  as   the  Feanorians   rode  from
 Nargothrond.  The   desertion  of   Celegorm  by   Huan  is   implied;  Beren
 gets Curufin's knife, which is to replace the  knife from  Tevildo's kitchens
 as  the  implement  with  which  Beren  cut  the   Silmaril  from   the  Iron
 Crown; and it is  Huan who  gets the  wolfskin, and  then utters  his parting
 speech.                                                                      
 An  extremely  difficult  page  in  pencil  ('Synopsis  IV') shows  these new
 elements being developed further:                                            
                                                                             
 Beren's heart  grows sad.  He says  he has  led Tinuviel  back to  the border
 of  her  land where  she is  safe. Alas  for their  second parting.  She says
 but from this land she herself escaped and  fled only  to be  with him  - yet
 she  admits  that  her  heart  longs  for  Doriath  and  Melian too,  but not
 Doriath   without   him.   He  quotes   his  own   words  to   Thingol:  'Not
 Morgoth's  fire  &c.'  - and  says he  cannot (even  if Thingol  would allow)
 return  emptyhanded.....  she  will  not  go  back.  She  will wander  in the
 woods  -  and if  he will  not take  her with  him she  will follow  his feet
 against  his  will.  He  protests  -  at  this  moment  Celegorm  and Curufin
 ride  up  seeking  the  way  North  [struck  out at  time of  writing: round
 Doriath  by  the  Gorgoroth]   between  Doriath   and  Taur-na-Fuin   to  the
 Gorge of Aglon and their own kin.                                            
   They  ride  straight  on  and  seek  to  ride  Beren  down.  Curufin stoops
 and lifts Luthien to his  saddle. Beren  leaps aside  and leaps  at Curufin's
 neck  [?hurling]  him  down.  Celegorm  with  his  spear  rides  up  to  slay
 Beren.  Huan  intervenes  scattering  the  [?brothers']  folk  and  dogs  and
 holds  Celegorm  at  bay  while  Beren  wrestles  with  Curufin   and  chokes
 him  senseless.  Beren  takes  his  weapons  -  especially  his  magic knife,
 and  bids  him  get on  horse and  be gone.  They ride  off. Huan  stays with
 Beren   and   Luthien  and   forsakes  his   master  [?for   ever].  Celegorm
 suddenly  turns  and  shoots  an  arrow  at  Huan   which  of   course  falls

                                                                                              
                                                                                               
  harmless  from  him,  but  Curufin  shoots  at  Beren   (and  Luthien)                        
  [changed to: shoots at Luthien] and wounds Beren.                                             
    Luthien heals Beren. They tell Huan of their  doubts and  debate and                        
  he goes off and brings the wolfham and batskin from the Wizard's Isle.                        
  Then he speaks for the last time.                                                             
    They prepare to go to Angband.                                                              
                                                                                               
 This was certainly prepared as an outline for Canto 10 of  the Lay,  for the                   
 section of the synopsis that follows is headed '11'.                                        
 There  is  here  the  further  development  that  Beren  and   Luthien  have                   
 come to the borders of Doriath; but the solitary departure of Beren after                   
 his healing, leaving Luthien  with Huan,  has still  not emerged.  There are                   
 a few differences  in the  account of  the fight  with Celegorm  and Curufin                   
 from the final form, but for the most part  the detail  of the  events was                   
 never changed from its first writing down (as I believe it to be)  on this                   
 page.  There  is  here  no  mention  of Beren's  taking Curufin's  horse, on                   
 which he was later to ride north by himself to Anfauglith; and  the detail                   
 of the shooting is different - in  the synopsis  Celegorm aimed  at Huan,                   
 and Curufin (who seems to have retained  his bow,  though Beren  took all                   
 his weapons)  at (Beren  and) Luthien.  There is  also mention  of 'folk'                   
 accompanying the brothers on their journey from Nargothrond.                                   
 In this outline is the first occurrence of the name Gorgoroth.                                 
 There  is  one  further  outline  ('Synopsis V'),  consisting of  four pages                   
 that are the concluding part of  a text  of which  the beginning  has dis-                   
 appeared: it  begins with  a heading  '10 continued',  which is  certainly a                   
 Canto  number,  though  the  content  extends  much  beyond  the  end  of                   
 Canto  X  in the  Lays.* The  text takes  up with  the healing  of Beren's                   
 wound.                                                                                       
                                                                                               
  Huan  brings  a  herb  of  healing,  and  Luthien  and  the hound  tend Beren                 
  in the  forest, building  a hut  of boughs.  Beren mending  will still  go on                 
  his quest. But Luthien foretells that all their lives will be forfeit if they                 
  pursue.  Beren  will  not  go  back  to  Doriath  otherwise.  Nor will  he or                 
  Huan  go  to  Nargothrond,  or  keep  Luthien   in  Thingol's   despite,  for                 
  war  would  certainly  arise  twixt   Elf  and   Elf,  [?even]   if  Orodreth                 
  harboured  them.  'Then  why  shall  we not  dwell here  in the  wood?' saith                 
  Luthien.  Because  of  danger  outside  Doriath,  and   the  Orcs,   and  the                 
  knowledge Morgoth must now possess of Luthien's wandering.                                    
    One  morning  early  Beren  steals  away  on  Curufin's  horse  and reaches                 
  the eaves of Taur-na-Fuin.                                                                    
                                                                                               
  Here at last is the element of Beren's solitary departure.                                   
                                                                                               
 (* It is also possible that '10 continued' means only that my father began Synopsis V at this
 point, i.e. he had already reached about line 3117 in the actual composition of the Lay when
 be began the outline.)    

    The casting out of Celegorm and Curufin from Nargothrond in the                     
  Lay is very closely followed in The Silmarillion (even to phrases, as                 
  'neither bread nor rest'); in the Lay, however, there are some who will go            
  with them (lines 29 I 4 - 15), a detail found in Synopsis IV, whereas in The         
  Silmarillion it is explicit that they went alone.*                                    
    The debate between Beren and Luthien which was interrupted by the                   
  coming of Celegorm and Curufin (lines 2930 - 82) is clearly based on the              
  scheme of it given in Synopsis IV (p. 272); in The Silmarillion it                    
  reappears, though much reduced and changed. The fight with Celegorm                   
  and Curufin is likewise derived from Synopsis IV, and is followed in the             
  prose of The Silmarillion - with such detail as the cursing of Beren                  
  'under cloud and sky', and Curufin's knife that would cut iron as if it were          
  green wood, hanging sheathless by his side. In the Lay the knife becomes              
  a dwarf-made weapon from Nogrod, though neither it nor its maker is yet               
  named. In the Lay the shooter of the treacherous shafts is Celegorm; in               
  The Silmarillion it is Curufin, using Celegorm's bow, and the vile act is             
  settled on the wickeder (as he was certainly also the cleverer) of the                
  brothers - in this Canto he is given the proper visage of a cunning villain: .        
  'with his crafty mouth and thin' (2905). The reference of line 3103 'and              
  Men remembered at the Marching Forth' is to the Union of Maidros                      
  before the Battle of Unnumbered Tears.                                                
    The second debate between Beren and Luthien after his recovery from                 
  the wound is derived from Synopsis V; it is not present at all in The                 
  Silmarillion, though it is not without its importance in its representation           
  of Beren's utter determination in the face of Luthien's persuasions to                
  abandon the quest.                                                                    
                                                                                       
    Two new elements in the  geography appear  in this  Canto: the  Hill of             
  Himling (later Himring) rising to the east of the Gorge of Aglon (2994),             
  and the river Mindeb: lines 2924 - 5 (and the  rewritten verses  given on             
  p. 360) seem to be the only description of it anywhere.                               
                                                                                       
    The curious element of Morgoth's particular interest in Luthien (so                 
  that he sent the Orc-captain Boldog to Doriath to capture  her, lines                 
  2127 - 36) reappears in this Canto (3I98 - 3201).                                     
                                                                                       
    At the beginning of the Canto the burial of Felagund leads to  a further            
  reference to his fate after death without mention of Mandos (see p. 259):            
                                                                                       
                    while Felagund laughs beneath the trees                             
                    in Valinor, and comes no more                                       
                    to this grey world of tears and war.                                
                                                                                       
                                           *                                            
                                                                                       
  (* The reference in The Silmarillion to Celebrimbor son of Curufin remaining in Nargo-
  thrond at this time and renouncing his father was a much later development.)          

                        
                                                 
                      XI.                         
                                                 
 Once wide and smooth a plain was spread,         
 where King Fingolfin proudly led                 
 his silver armies on the green,                  
 his horses white, his lances keen;               
 his helmets tall of steel were hewn,         3250
 his shields were shining as the moon.            
 There trumpets sang both long and loud,          
 and challenge rang unto the cloud                
 that lay on Morgoth's northern tower,            
 while Morgoth waited for his hour.           3255
                                                 
 Rivers of fire at dead of night                  
 in winter lying cold and white                   
 upon the plain burst forth, and high             
 the red was mirrored in the sky.                 
 From Hithlum's walls they saw the fire,      3260
 the steam and smoke in spire on spire            
 leap up, till in confusion vast                  
 the stars were choked. And so it passed,         
 the mighty field, and turned to dust,            
 to drifting sand and yellow rust,            3265
 to thirsty dunes where many bones                
 lay broken among barren stones.                  
 Dor-na-Fauglith, Land of Thirst,                 
 they after named it, waste accurst,              
 the raven-haunted roofless grave             3270
 of many fair and many brave.                     
 Thereon the stony slopes look forth              
 from Deadly Nightshade falling north,            
 from sombre pines with pinions vast,             
 black-plumed and drear, as many a mast       3275
 of sable-shrouded ships of death                 
 slow wafted on a ghostly breath.                 
                                                 
  Thence Beren grim now gazes out                 
 across the dunes and shifting drought,           
 and sees afar the frowning towers            3280
 where thunderous Thangorodrim lowers.            
  The hungry horse there drooping stood,          
 proud Gnomish steed; it feared the wood;         
 upon the haunted ghastly plain                   

 no horse would ever stride again.          3285
 'Good steed of master ill,' he said,            
 'farewell now here! Lift up thy head,           
 and get thee gone to Sirion's vale,             
 back as we came, past island pale               
 where Thu once reigned, to waters sweet    3290
 and grasses long about thy feet.                
 And if Curufin no more thou find,               
 grieve not! but free with hart and hind         
 go wander, leaving work and war,                
 and dream thee back in Valinor,            3295
 whence came of old thy mighty race              
 from Tavros' mountain-fenced chase.'            
                                                
   There still sat Beren, and he sang,           
 and loud his lonely singing rang.               
 Though Orc should hear, or wolf a-prowl,   3300
 or any of the creatures foul                    
 within the shade that slunk and stared          
 of Taur-na-Fuin, nought he cared,               
 who now took leave of light and day,            
 grim-hearted, bitter, fierce and fey.      3305
                                                
   'Farewell now here, ye leaves of trees,       
 your music in the morning-breeze!               
 Farewell now blade and bloom and grass          
 that see the changing seasons pass;             
 ye waters murmuring over stone,            3310
 and meres that silent stand alone!              
 Farewell now mountain, vale, and plain!         
 Farewell now wind and frost and rain,           
 and mist and cloud, and heaven's air;           
 ye star and moon so blinding-fair          3315
 that still shall look down from the sky         
 on the wide earth, though Beren die -           
 though Beren die not, and yet deep,             
 deep, whence comes of those that weep           
 no dreadful echo, lie and choke            3320
 in everlasting dark and smoke.                  
   'Farewell sweet earth and northern sky,       
 for ever blest, since here did lie,             
 and here with lissom limbs did run,             
 beneath the moon, beneath the sun,         3325

                                               
                                                  
 Luthien Tinuviel                                  
 more fair than mortal tongue can tell.            
 Though all to ruin fell the world,                
 and were dissolved and backward hurled            
 unmade into the old abyss,                  3330
 yet were its making good, for this -              
 the dawn, the dusk, the earth, the sea -          
 that Luthien on a time should be! '               
                                                  
   His blade he lifted high in hand,               
 and challenging alone did stand             3335
 before the threat of Morgoth's power;             
 and dauntless cursed him, hall and tower,         
 o'ershadowing hand and grinding foot,             
 beginning, end, and crown and root;               
 then turned to stride forth down the slope  3340
 abandoning fear, forsaking hope.                  
                                                  
 'A, Beren, Beren! ' came a sound,                 
 'almost too late have I thee found!               
 0 proud and fearless hand and heart,              
 not yet farewell, not yet we part!          3345
 Not thus do those of elven race                   
 forsake the love that they embrace.               
 A love is mine, as great a power                  
 as thine, to shake the gate and tower             
 of death with challenge weak and frail      3350
 that yet endures, and will not fail               
 nor yield, unvanquished were it hurled            
 beneath the foundations of the world.             
 Beloved fool! escape to seek                      
 from such pursuit; in might so weak         3355
 to trust not, thinking it well to save            
 from love thy loved, who welcomes grave           
 and torment sooner than in guard                  
 of kind intent to languish, barred,               
 wingless and helpless him to aid            3360
 for whose support her love was made!'            
                                                  
   Thus back to him came Luthien:                  
 they met beyond the ways of Men;                  
 upon the brink of terror stood                    
 between the desert and the wood.            3365

               
                                                 
 He looked on her, her lifted face                
 beneath his lips in sweet embrace:               
 'Thrice now mine oath I curse,' he said,         
 'that under shadow thee hath led!                
 But where is Huan, where the hound           3370
 to whom I trusted, whom I bound                  
 by love of thee to keep thee well                
 from deadly wandering unto hell? '               
                                                 
 'I know not! But good Huan's heart               
 is wiser, kinder than thou art,              3375
 grim lord, more open unto prayer!                
 Yet long and long I pleaded there,               
 until he brought me, as I would,                 
 upon thy trail - a palfrey good                  
 would Huan make, of flowing pace:            3380
 thou wouldst have laughed to see us race,        
 as Orc on werewolf ride like fire                
 night after night through fen and mire,          
 through waste and wood! But when I heard         
 thy singing clear - (yea, every word         3385
 of Luthien one rashly cried,                     
 and listening evil fierce defied) -,             
 he set me down, and sped away;                   
 but what he would I cannot say.'                 
                                                 
 Ere long they knew, for Huan came,           339
 his great breath panting, eyes like flame,       
 in fear lest her whom he forsook                 
 to aid some hunting evil took                    
 ere he was nigh. Now there he laid               
 before their feet, as dark as shade,         3395
 two grisly shapes that he had won                
 from that tall isle in Sirion:                   
 a wolfhame huge - its savage fell                
 was long and matted, dark the spell              
 that drenched the dreadful coat and skin,    3400
 the werewolf cloak of Draugluin;                 
 the other was a batlike garb                     
 with mighty fingered wings, a barb               
 like iron nail at each joint's end -             
 such wings as their dark cloud extend        3405
 against the moon, when in the sky                

 from Deadly Nightshade screeching fly             
 Thu's messengers.                                 
                                                  
                   'What hast thou brought,        
 good Huan? What thy hidden thought?               
 Of trophy of prowess and strong deed,        3410
 when Thu thou vanquishedst, what need             
 here in the waste?' Thus Beren spoke,            
 and once more words in Huan woke:                 
 his voice was like the deeptoned bells            
 that ring in Valmar's citadels:              3415
                                                  
 'Of one fair gem thou must be thief,              
 Morgoth's or Thingol's, loath or lief;            
 thou must here choose twixt love and oath!        
 If vow to break is still thee loath,              
 then Luthien must either die                 3420
 alone, or death with thee defie                   
 beside thee, marching on your fate                
 that hidden before you lies in wait.              
 Hopeless the quest, but not yet mad,              
 unless thou, Beren, run thus clad            3425
 in mortal raiment, mortal hue,                    
 witless and redeless, death to woo.               
 'Lo! good was Felagund's device,                  
 but may be bettered, if advice                    
 of Huan ye will dare to take,                3430
 and swift a hideous change will make              
 to forms most cursed, foul and vile,              
 of werewolf of the Wizard's Isle,                 
 of monstrous bat's envermined fell                
 with ghostly clawlike wings of hell.         3435
 'To such dark straits, alas! now brought          
 are ye I love, for whom I fought.                 
 Nor further with you can I go -                   
 whoever did a great hound know                    
 in friendship at a werewolf's side           3440
 to Angband's grinning portals stride?             
 Yet my heart tells that at the gate               
 what there ye find, 'twill be my fate             
 myself to see, though to that door                
 my feet shall bear me nevermore.             3445
 Darkened is hope and dimmed my eyes,              

 I see not clear what further lies;                   
 yet maybe backwards leads your path                  
 beyond all hope to Doriath,                          
 and thither, perchance, we three shall wend,   3450
 and meet again before the end.'                      
                                                     
   They stood and marvelled thus to hear              
 his mighty tongue so deep and clear;                 
 then sudden he vanished from their sight             
 even at the onset of the night.                3455
                                                     
   His dreadful counsel then they took,               
 and their own gracious forms forsook;                
 in werewolf fell and batlike wing                    
 prepared to robe them, shuddering.                   
   With elvish magic Luthien wrought,                 
 lest raiment foul with evil fraught                  
 to dreadful madness drive their hearts;              
 and there she wrought with elvish arts               
 a strong defence, a binding power,                   
 singing until the midnight hour.               3465
                                                     
   Swift as the wolvish coat he wore,                 
 Beren lay slavering on the floor,                    
 redtongued and hungry; but there lies                
 a pain and longing in his eyes,                      
 a look of horror as he sees                    3470
 a batlike form crawl to its knees                    
 and drag its creased and creaking wings.             
 Then howling undermoon he springs                    
 fourfooted, swift, from stone to stone,              
 from hill to plain - but not alone:            3475
 a dark shape down the slope doth skim,               
 and wheeling Hitters over him.                       
                                                     
   Ashes and dust and thirsty dune                    
 withered and dry beneath the moon,                   
 under the cold and shifting air                3480
 sifting and sighing, bleak and bare;                 
 of blistered stones and gasping sand,                
 of splintered bones was built that land,             
 o'er which now slinks with powdered fell             
 and hanging tongue a shape of hell.            3485
   Many parching leagues lay still before             

 when sickly day crept back once more;            
 many choking miles yet stretched ahead           
 when shivering night once more was spread        
 with doubtful shadow and ghostly sound       3490
 that hissed and passed o'er dune and mound.      
   A second morning in cloud and reek             
 struggled, when stumbling, blind and weak,       
 a wolvish shape came staggering forth            
 and reached the foothills of the North;      3495
 upon its back there folded lay                   
 a crumpled thing that blinked at day.            
                                                 
 The rocks were reared like bony teeth,           
 and claws that grasped from opened sheath,       
 on either side the mournful road             3500
 that onward led to that abode                    
 far up within the Mountain dark                  
 with tunnels drear and portals stark.            
 They crept within a scowling shade,              
 and cowering darkly down them laid.          3505
 Long lurked they there beside the path,          
 and shivered, dreaming of Doriath,               
 of laughter and music and clean air,             
 in fluttered leaves birds singing fair.          
 They woke, and felt the trembling sound,     3510
 the beating echo far underground                 
 shake beneath them, the rumour vast              
 of Morgoth's forges; and aghast                  
 they heard the tramp of stony feet               
 that shod with iron went down that street:   3515
 the Orcs went forth to rape and war,             
 and Balrog captains marched before.              
                                                 
   They stirred, and under cloud and shade        
 at eve stepped forth, and no more stayed;        
 as dart things on dark errand bent           3520
 up the long slopes in haste they went.           
 Ever the sheer cliffs rose beside,               
 where birds of carrion sat and cried;            
 and chasms black and smoking yawned,             
 whence writhing serpent-shapes were spawned; 3525
 until at last in that huge gloom,                
 heavy as overhanging doom,                       

             that weighs on Thangorodrim's foot                            
             like thunder at the mountain's root,                          
             they came, as to a sombre court                        3530
             walled with great towers, fort on fort                        
             of cliffs embattled, to that last plain                       
             that opens, abysmal and inane,                                
             before the final topless wall                                 
             of Bauglir's immeasurable hall,                        3535
             whereunder looming awful waits                                
             the gigantic shadow of his gates.                             
                                                                          
                                   NOTES.                                  
                                                                          
  3249-53.   Cf. the opening of the Lay, lines 5 - 10.                      
    3267.   Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 26 1930'. The      
            previous date was 25 Sept. 1930 at line 3220.                  
    3297.   Tavros > Tauros B: see notes to lines 891, 904; 2246.           
    3303.   Taur-na-Fuin > Taur-nu-Fuin B (a late change).                 
    3401.   Draugluin appears here in the A-text (see p. 258).             
 3414-15.   Cf. lines 2258 - 9.                                            
 3419-23.   The shift from thee to your and you is intentional, and        
            indicates that Huan now refers to both Beren and Luthien.      
    3478.   Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 27 1930'.          
                                                                          
                           Commentary on Canto XI.                         
                                                                          
 The earliest version of the  narrative of  this Canto  describes Tinuviel's
 sewing  of  Beren  into  the  catskin  of  Oikeroi  and  teaching  him some
 aspects of feline behaviour; she herself was not disguised. Very  little is
 made  of  the  journey  to  Angamandi,  but  the approach  to the  gates is
 described:                                                                
                                                                          
  At  length  however   they  drew   near  to   Angamandi,  as   indeed  the
  rumblings  and  deep  noises,  and  the  sound  of  mighty  hammerings  of
  ten  thousand  smiths  labouring  unceasingly,  declared  to   them.  Nigh
  were  the  sad  chambers  where   the  thrall-Noldoli   laboured  bitterly
  under  the  Orcs  and  goblins  of  the  hills,  and  here  the  gloom and
  darkness was great so that their hearts fell... (II. 31).                
                                                                          
  Synopses  I  and  II  have virtually  nothing here  beyond the  bare event
 (p.  270).  In  its  emended  form  Synopsis  III comes  near to  the final

 
                                                                                      
 story of the 'wolfhame' and the parting from Huan (p. 272); and this                
 outline continues:                                                                    
                                                                                      
    Thangorodrim  towers  above  them.  There  are rumblings,  steam and               
    vapours burst from  fissures in  the rock.  Ten thousand  smiths are               
    hammering - they pass the vaults where the thrall-Gnomes are labour-               
    ing without rest. The gloom sinks into their hearts.                               
                                                                                      
 This  is  remarkably  close  to  the  passage  cited  above  from  the   Tale  of
 Tinuviel.                                                                           
    Synopsis  IV  (p.  273)  adds  no  more,  for  after  'They  prepare  to   go  to
 Angband'  it  continues  with  events  in  Doriath  and  the embassy  to Thingol
 from  Celegorm,   which  at   this  stage   my  father   was  'going   to  introduce
 before  the  Angband  adventure,  and  in  this  outline  virtually  nothing  is
 said of that.                                                                       
   There   remains   Synopsis   V,   whose   outline   for   Canto  '10'   has  been
 given  on  p.  273  as  far  as  'One  morning  early  Beren  steals   away  on
 Curufin's  horse  and  reaches  the  eaves  of  Taur-na-Fuin',  and  it  is  here
 that  Beren's  solitary  departure  first  enters.  This outline  continues, still
 under the heading 'Canto 10':                                                         
                                                                                      
    There he  looks upon  Thangorodrim and  sings a  song of  farewell to              
    earth and light, and to  Luthien. In  the midst  up come  Luthien and              
    Huan! With the hound's aid she  has followed  him; and  moreover from              
    the Wizard's Isle Huan has brought a wolf-ham and a bat-coat. [Struck              
    throught at  time  of   writing:  Beren   sets  Luthien   upon  the   horse  and
    they  ride  through  Taur-na-Fuin.*]  Beren  sets  Curufin's  horse   to  gallop
    free  and  he  speeds  away.  Now  Beren  takes  the  shape  of   werewolf  and
    Tinuviel  of  bat.  Then  Huan  bids  farewell.  And   speaks.  No   hound  can
    walk  with  werewolf  -  more  peril  should  I  be  than  help   in  Morgoth's
    land.  Yet  what ye  shall see  at Angband's  gate I  perchance too  shall see,
    though  my  fate  doth  not  lead  to those  doors. Darkened  is all  hope, and
    dimmed  my  eyes,  yet  perchance  I  see  thy  paths  leading from  that place
    once   more.  Then   he  vanishes.   They  make   a  grievous   journey.  Than-
    gorodrim looms over them,........ in its smoky foothills.                          
                                                                                      
   This ends the outline for 'Canto 10' in Synopsis V.                                 
                                                                                      
    There  is  a  notable  difference  in  the  structure  of the  story in  the Lay
    from  that  in  The  Silmarillion  (pp.  178  - g):  in the  Lay Huan  is absent
    (gone  to  the  Wizard's  Isle  for  the  wolfcoat  and  batskin)  when  Luthien
    finds  Beren  -  she does  not know  where he  has gone  - but  he comes  up a
    little  later;  whereas  in  the  prose  account Huan  and Luthien  came to-
    gether,  and  they  were  clad  in  'the ghastly  wolf-hame of  Draugluin and
    the  bat-fell  of  Thuringwethil'  -  an  apparition  that  filled  Beren  with
                                                                                      
   (* Beren must in fact have been on the northern edge of Taur-na-Fuin when Luthien and
    Huan came up with him, since 'he looks upon Thangorodrim'.)                      

  dismay. The story in The Silmarillion is a reversion,  at least  in so  far as
  Huan  and  Luthien  arrive  together,  to that  of Synopsis  V ('In  the midst
  up come Luthien and Huan', p. 283).                                           
    In  the  Lay  the  bat-wings  are  only  said to  be such  as bear  up Thu's
  messengers,  and  are  not  associated  with a  particular or  chief messenger
  (Thuringwethil, 'messenger of Sauron').                                       
    But the prose version in  other respects  follows that  of the  Lay closely,
  with  as  before  retention  of phrases  ('between the  desert and  the wood',
  'Thrice  now  I  curse  my oath',  'fingered wings...  barbed at  each joint's
  end',  'the bat  wheeled and  flittered above  him'); and  the speech  of Huan
  is closely modelled on that in the Lay.                                       
    From Beren's words to the horse (3288 - 90)                                 
                                                                               
                      get  thee  gone  to   Sirion's  vale,                     
                      back  as  we  came, past  island pale                     
                      where Thu once reigned                                    
                                                                               
  it is clear that  as in  The Silmarillion  'he rode  northward again  with all
  speed to  the Pass  of Sirion,  and coming  to the  skirts of  Taur-nu-Fuin he
  looked out across the waste  of Anfauglith'.  It is  not said  in the  Lay how
  Luthien  and  Huan  came  there,  but  in  The  Silmarillion  'clad  in these
  dreadful  garments'  they  'ran  through  Taur-nu-Fuin,  and  all  things fled
  before them'.                                                                 
                                                                               
    The  Battle  of Sudden  Flame (lines  3256 ff.)  has been  described earlier
  in the Lay (lines 1678 ff.), but it has not been actually stated  before that
  the  northern  plain  was  once  green  and grassy  (3246 -  8), and  became a
  desert after the 'rivers of fire... upon the plain burst forth'.              
                                                                               
    With Beren's words to Curufin's horse (3295 - 7):                          
                                                                               
                            dream thee back in Valinor,                         
                        whence came of old thy mighty race                      
                                                                               
  cf. The Silmarillion p. 119, where it is told that 'many of the sires' of the
  horses  of  the  Noldor   of  Hithlum   who  rode   on  Ard-galen   came  from
  Valinor.                                                                      
                                                                               
                                       *                                        
                                                                               
                                      XII.                                     
                                                                               
               In that vast shadow once of yore                                 
               Fingolfin stood: his shield he bore                              
               with field of heaven's blue and star                       3540
               of crystal shining pale afar.                                    
               In overmastering wrath and hate                                  
               desperate he smote upon that gate,                               

 the Gnomish king, there standing lone,            
 while endless fortresses of stone             3545
 engulfed the thin clear ringing keen              
 of silver horn on baldric green.                  
 His hopeless challenge dauntless cried            
 Fingolfin there: 'Come, open wide,                
 dark king, your ghastly brazen doors!         3550
 Come forth, whom earth and heaven abhors!         
 Come forth, 0 monstrous craven lord,              
 and fight with thine own hand and sword,          
 thou wielder of hosts of banded thralls,          
 thou tyrant leaguered with strong walls,      3555
 thou foe of Gods and elvish race!                 
 I wait thee here. Come! Show thy face! '          
                                                  
 Then Morgoth came. For the last time              
 in those great wars he dared to climb             
 from subterranean throne profound,            3560
 the rumour of his feet a sound                    
 of rumbling earthquake underground.               
 Black-armoured, towering, iron-crowned            
 he issued forth; his mighty shield                
 a vast unblazoned sable field                 3565
 with shadow like a thundercloud;                  
 and o'er the gleaming king it bowed,              
 as huge aloft like mace he hurled                 
 that hammer of the underworld,                    
 Grond. Clanging to ground it tumbled          3570
 down like a thunder-bolt, and crumbled            
 the rocks beneath it; smoke up-started,           
 a pit yawned, and a fire darted.                  
                                                  
 Fingolfin like a shooting light                   
 beneath a cloud, a stab of white,             3575
 sprang then aside, and Ringil drew                
 like ice that gleameth cold and blue,             
 his sword devised of elvish skill                 
 to pierce the flesh with deadly chill.            
 With seven wounds it rent his foe,            3580
 and seven mighty cries of woe                     
 rang in the mountains, and the earth quook,       
 and Angband's trembling armies shook.             
 Yet Orcs would after laughing tell                

 of the duel at the gates of hell;         3585
 though elvish song thereof was made           
 ere this but one - when sad was laid          
 the mighty king in barrow high,               
 and Thorndor, Eagle of the sky,               
 the dreadful tidings brought and told     3590
 to mourning Elfinesse of old.                 
 Thrice was Fingolfin with great blows         
 to his knees beaten, thrice he rose           
 still leaping up beneath the cloud            
 aloft to hold star-shining, proud,        3595
 his stricken shield, his sundered helm,       
 that dark nor might could overwhelm           
 till all the earth.was burst and rent         
 in pits about him. He was spent.              
 His feet stumbled. He fell to wreck       3600
 upon the ground, and on his neck              
 a foot like rooted hills was set,             
 and he was crushed - not conquered yet;       
 one last despairing stroke he gave:           
 the mighty foot pale Ringil clave         3605
 about the heel, and black the blood           
 gushed as from smoking fount in flood.        
 Halt goes for ever from that stroke           
 great Morgoth; but the king he broke,         
 and would have hewn and mangled thrown    3610
 to wolves devouring. Lo! from throne          
 that Manwe bade him build on high,            
 on peak unscaled beneath the sky,             
 Morgoth to watch, now down there swooped      
 Thorndor the King of Eagles, stooped,     3615
 and rending beak of gold he smote             
 in Bauglir's face, then up did float          
 on pinions thirty fathoms wide                
 bearing away, though loud they cried,         
 the mighty corse, the Elven-king;         3620
 and where the mountains make a ring           
 far to the south about that plain             
 where after Gondolin did reign,               
 embattled city, at great height               
 upon a dizzy snowcap white                3625
 in mounded cairn the mighty dead              

 he laid upon the mountain's head.                
 Never Orc nor demon after dared                  
 that pass to climb, o'er which there stared      
 Fingolfin's high and holy tomb,              3630
 till Gondolin's appointed doom.                  
                                                 
 Thus Bauglir earned the furrowed scar            
 that his dark countenance doth mar,              
 and thus his limping gait he gained;             
 but afterward profound he reigned            3635
 darkling upon his hidden throne;                 
 and thunderous paced his halls of stone,         
 slow building there his vast design              
 the world in thraldom to confine.                
 Wielder of armies, lord of woe,              3640
 no rest now gave he slave or foe;                
 his watch and ward he thrice increased,          
 his spies were sent from West to East            
 and tidings brought from all the North,          
 who fought, who fell; who ventured forth,    3645
 who wrought in secret; who had hoard;            
 if maid were fair or proud were lord;            
 well nigh all things he knew, all hearts         
 well nigh enmeshed in evil arts.                 
 Doriath only, beyond the veil                3650
 woven by Melian, no assail                       
 could hurt or enter; only rumour dim             
 of things there passing came to him.             
 A rumour loud and tidings clear                  
 of other movements far and near              3655
 among his foes, and threat of war                
 from the seven sons of Feanor,                   
 from Nargothrond, from Fingon still              
 gathering his armies under hill                  
 and under tree in Hithlum's shade,           3660
 these daily came. He grew afraid                 
 amidst his power once more; renown               
 of Beren vexed his ears, and down                
 the aisled forests there was heard               
 great Huan baying.                               
                                                 
                        Then came word        3665
 most passing strange of Luthien                  

 wild-wandering by wood and glen,                    
 and Thingol's purpose long he weighed,              
 and wondered, thinking of that maid                 
 so fair, so frail. A captain dire,               3670
 Boldog, he sent with sword and fire                 
 to Doriath's march; but battle fell                 
 sudden upon him: news to tell                       
 never one returned of Boldog's host,                
 and Thingol humbled Morgoth's boast.             3675           
 Then his heart with doubt and wrath was burned:     
 new tidings of dismay he learned,                   
 how Thu was o'erthrown and his strong isle          
 broken and plundered, how with guile                
 his foes now guile beset; and spies         3680
 he feared, till each Orc to his eyes                
 was half suspect. Still ever down                   
                                                    
 the  aisled  forests   came  renown                 
 of  Huan   baying,  hound   of  war                 
 that  Gods  unleashed  in  Valinor.             3685
                                                    
 Then Morgoth of Huan's fate bethought               
 long-rumoured, and in dark he wrought.              
 Fierce hunger-haunted packs he had                  
 that in wolvish form and flesh were clad,           
 but demon spirits dire did hold;                3690
 and ever wild their voices rolled                   
 in cave and mountain where they housed              
 and endless snarling echoes roused.                 
 From these a whelp he chose and fed                 
 with his own hand on bodies dead,               3695
 on fairest flesh of Elves and Men,                  
 till huge he grew and in his den                    
 no more could creep, but by the chair               
 of Morgoth's self would lie and glare,              
 nor suffer Balrog, Orc, nor beast               3700
 to touch him. Many a ghastly feast                  
 he held beneath that awful throne,                  
 rending flesh and gnawing bone.                     
 There deep enchantment on him fell,                 
 the anguish and the power of hell;              3705
 more great and terrible he became                   
 with fire-red eyes and jaws aflame,                 

                                              
                                                  
 with breath like vapours of the grave,            
 than any beast of wood or cave,                   
 than any beast of earth or hell             3710
 that ever in any time befell,                     
 surpassing all his race and kin,                  
 the ghastly tribe of Draugluin.                   
                                                  
 Him Carcharoth, the Red Maw, name                 
 the songs of Elves. Not yet he came         3715
 disastrous, ravening, from the gates              
 of Angband. There he sleepless waits;             
 where those great portals threatening loom        
 his red eyes smoulder in the gloom,               
 his teeth are bare, his jaws are wide;      3720
 and none may walk, nor creep, nor glide,          
 nor thrust with power his menace past             
 to enter Morgoth's dungeon vast.                  
                                                  
 Now, lo! before his watchful eyes                 
 a slinking shape he far descries            3725
 that crawls into the frowning plain               
 and halts at gaze, then on again                  
 comes stalking near, a wolvish shape              
 haggard, wayworn, with jaws agape;                
 and o'er it batlike in wide rings           3730
 a reeling shadow slowly wings.                    
 Such shapes there oft were seen to roam,          
 this land their native haunt and home;            
 and yet his mood with strange unease              
 is filled, and boding thoughts him seize.   3735
                                                  
 'What grievous terror, what dread guard           
 hath Morgoth set to wait, and barred              
 his doors against all entering feet?              
 Long ways we have come at last to meet            
 the very maw of death that opes             3740
 between us and our quest! Yet hopes               
 we never had. No turning back! '                  
 Thus Beren speaks, as in his track                
 he halts and sees with werewolf eyes              
 afar the horror that there lies.            3745
 Then onward desperate he passed,                  
 skirting the black pits yawning vast,             

 where King Fingolfin ruinous fell             
 alone before the gates of hell.               
                                              
 Before those gates alone they stood,      3750
 while Carcharoth in doubtful mood             
 glowered upon them, and snarling spoke,       
 and echoes in the arches woke:                
 'Hail! Draugluin, my kindred's lord!          
 'Tis very long since hitherward           3755
 thou camest. Yea, 'tis passing strange        
 to see thee now: a grievous change            
 is on thee, lord, who once so dire,           
 so daunt1ess, and as fleet as fire,           
 ran over wild and waste, but now          3760
 with weariness must bend and bow!             
 'Tis hard to find the struggling breath       
 when Huan's teeth as sharp as death           
 have rent the throat? What fortune rare       
 brings thee back living here to fare -    3765
 if Draugluin thou art? Come near!             
 I would know more, and see thee clear.'       
                                              
   'Who art thou, hungry upstart whelp,        
 to bar my ways whom thou shouldst help?       
 I fare with hasty tidings new             3770
 to Morgoth from forest-haunting Thu.          
 Aside! for I must in; or go                   
 and swift my coming tell below! '             
                                              
   Then up that doorward slowly stood,        
 eyes shining grim with evil mood,         3775
 uneasy growling: 'Draugluin,                  
 if such thou be, now enter in!               
 But what is this that crawls beside,          
 slinking as if 'twould neath thee hide?       
 Though winged creatures to and fro        3780
 unnumbered pass here, all I know.             
 I know not this. Stay, vampire, stay!         
 I like not thy kin nor thee. Come, say        
 what sneaking errand thee doth bring,         
 thou winged vermin, to the king!          3785
 Small matter, I doubt not, if thou stay       
 or enter, or if in my play                    

 I crush thee like a fly on wall,                    
 or bite thy wings and let thee crawl.'              
                                                    
 Huge-stalking, noisome, close he came.          3790
 In Beren's eyes there gleamed a flame;              
 the hair upon his neck uprose.                      
 Nought may the fragrance fair enclose,              
 the odour of immortal flowers                       
 in everlasting spring neath showers             3795
 that glitter silver in the grass                    
 in Valinor. Where'er did pass                       
 Tinuviel, such air there went.                      
 From that foul devil-sharpened scent                
 its sudden sweetness no disguise                3800
 enchanted dark to cheat the eyes                    
 could keep, if near those nostrils drew             
 snuffling in doubt. This Beren knew                 
 upon the brink of hell prepared                     
 for battle and death. There threatening stared  3805
 those dreadful shapes, in hatred both,              
 false Draugluin and Carcharoth                      
 when, lo! a marvel to behold:                       
 some power, descended from of old,                  
 from race divine beyond the West,               3810
 sudden Tinuviel possessed                           
 like inner fire. The vampire dark                   
 she flung aside, and like a lark                    
 cleaving through night to dawn she sprang,          
 while sheer, heart-piercing silver, rang        3815
 her voice, as those long trumpets keen              
 thrilling, unbearable, unseen                       
 in the cold aisles of morn. Her cloak               
 by white hands woven, like a smoke,                 
 like all-bewildering, all-enthralling,          3820
 all-enfolding evening, falling                      
 from lifted arms, as forth she stepped,             
 across those awful eyes she swept,                  
 a shadow and a mist of dreams                       
 wherein entangled starlight gleams.             3825
                                                    
 'Sleep, 0 unhappy, tortured thrall!                 
 Thou woebegotten, fail and fall                     
 down, down from anguish, hatred, pain,              

            from lust, from hunger, bond and chain,                       
            to that oblivion, dark and deep,                         3830
            the well, the lightless pit of sleep!                         
            For one brief hour escape the net,                            
            the dreadful doom of life forget! '                           
                                                                         
               His eyes were quenched, his limbs were loosed;             
            he fell like running steer that noosed                   3835
            and tripped goes crashing to the ground.                      
            Deathlike, moveless, without a sound                          
            outstretched he lay, as lightning stroke                      
            had felled a huge o'ershadowing oak.                          
                                                                         
                                    NOTES.                                
                                                                         
  3554.      banded A, B; > branded B, but I think that the r was         
             written in by somebody else.                                 
  3589.      Thorndor emended to Thorondor in B, but I think that this
             was a late correction.                                       
  3606.      pinned it to earth A, B; about the heel apparently a late
             emendation to B.                                             
  3615.      Thorndor later emended to Thorondor in B, see 3589.        
  3623.      after > secret B, a late emendation when Gondolin's found-
             ation had been made much earlier.                            
 3638-9.     A: nor ever again to war came forth                          
             until the last battle of the North,                          
             but builded slow his mighty thought                          
             of pride and lust unfathomed wrought.                        
  3650.      Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 28'. The previous
             date was 27 Sept. 1930 against line 3478.                    
  3658.      Finweg A, B, emended to Fingon B, as at lines 1647, 1654.
 3712 - 13.  This couplet not in A, as originally written.                
   3714.     A (as originally written):                                   
                                                                         
                   Him Carcharos, the Knife-fang, name                    
                                                                         
             Carcharos  then  >  Carcharas,  and  then  >  Carcharoth (see
             notes to lines 3751, 3807). In the margin of A is written Red
             Natu,  and  Caras  with  another,  illegible,  word beginning
             Car-;  also  Gargaroth;  and  Fearphantom  Draugluin  is  his
             name.  This may  mean that  my father  was thinking  of using
             the  name  Draugluin   for  the   Wolf  of   Angband,  though

                                                                  
                                                                                               
        Draugluin had by now appeared in the A-text (3401) for the                              
        great wolf of the Wizard's Isle.                                                        
    3751. Carcharas A, not emended to Carcharoth (see note to 3714).                              
    3790. Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 30  1930. The                              
          previous date was 28 Sept. 1930 against line 3650.                                          
    3807. Carcharoth  A  (rhyming  with both);  see notes  to 3714,                              
                                                                                               
          3751.                                                                                 
                                                                                               
                                   Commentary on Canto XII.                                     
                                                                                               
 The greater part of this Canto is retrospective: beginning with  the death                  
 of Fingolfin in combat  with Morgoth,  it passes  to Morgoth's  doubts and                  
 fears  and  his rearing  of Carcharoth.  By this  time (September  1930) a                  
 large part, at any rate, of the  prose 'Silmarillion'  developed out  of the                  
 '.  'Sketch of  the Mythology'  had been  written, as  I hope  to demonstrate                  
 , later, and it seems certain that the story of Fingolfin's duel with Morgoth                  
 ', as it appears in this Canto followed the prose version, though we  meet it                  
 :  here  for the  first time  (together with  the names Grond, the  Hammer of                  
 the  Underworld,  and  Ringil,  Fingolfin's  sword).  The  text  in  The Sil-                  
 marillion (pp. 153 - 4) was largely  based on  the Lay,  which it  follows in                  
 ,- the structure  of the  account and  from which  derive many  phrases;* but                  
 : independent traces of the 'prose tradition' are  also present.  The account                  
 in the poem  gives no  indication of  when the  duel took  place, or  of what                  
 led  Fingolfin  to  challenge  Morgoth.  For  the  much  earlier  mention  of                  
 Fingolfin's  death  (now  very  obscure,  but  certainly   quite  differently                  
 Conceived) see pp. 146-7.                                                                      
  The  further  mention  in  this  Canto  of  Boldog's  raid  (lines  3665-75)                  
 : will be discussed at the end of the poem (pp. 3IO - 13).                                     
                                                                                               
   Turning to the 'foreground' narrative, a passage in Synopsis III                             
 ' already given (pp. 270-1) bears on the content of Canto XII: it was                          
 bracketed and marked 'Later'.                                                                  
                                                                                               
   Morgoth  hearing  of  the  breaking of  the Wizard's  Tower sends  out an                    
   army  of  Orcs;  finding  the  wolves  are  slain  with......  throats he                    
   thinks it is Huan and fashions a vast wolf - Carcharas - mightiest of all                    
   wolves to guard his door.                                                                    
                                                                                               
  Synopsis III continues from the point reached on p. 283:                                      
                                                                                               
     The hideous gates of Angband. There lay Carcharoth knifefang.                              
   He gets slowly to his feet and bars the gate. 'Growl not 0 Wolf for I go                     
   to seek Morgoth with news of  Thu.' He  approached to  snuff the  air of                     
                                                                                               
 (* For example: 'the rumour of his feet' (cf. line 3561); Morgoth 'like a tower, iron-     
 crowned'(cf. 3563); he Grond down like a bolt of thunder' (cf 3571); smoke and
 fire darted' (cf. 3572 - 3); 'the blood gushed forth black and smoking' (cf. 3606 - 7); &c.)

 her,  for faint  suspicion moved  in his  wicked heart,  and he  fell into
 slumber.                                                                   
                                                                           
 The interpretation of the  wolf's name  as 'Knife-fang'  goes back  to the
 Tale of Tinuviel and survived into the A-text of the Lay (see note to line
 3714),  but was  replaced in  B by  the translation  'Red Maw'.  The words
 'red maw' are used of Karkaras in the Tale, but not as his name (II. 34).
 The idea of Carcharoth's  approaching Luthien  'to snuff  the air  of her'
 is also derived, in these same words, from the Tale (I I. 31).          
                                                                           
 Synopsis  IV does  not here  concern us  (see p.  283); Synopsis  V, after
 the point reached on p. 283, now has a heading 'x x',  and is  clearly the
 basis for the story in Canto XII of the Lay:                               
                                                                           
 [Added in pencil: Battle of Morgoth and Fingolfin.]                        
   Morgoth  hears of  the ruin  of Thu's  castle. His  mind is  filled with
 misgiving  and  anger.  The  gates  of  Angband  strengthened;  because of
 the  rumour  of  Huan  he  [struck out  at time  of writing:  fashions the
 greatest] chooses the fiercest wolf from all the whelps of his  packs, and
 feeds  him  on  flesh  of  Men  and  Elves,  and enchants  him so  that he
 becomes the most great and terrible of all  beasts that  ever have  been -
 Carcharos.                                                                 
   Beren  and  Luthien  approach.  [Added  in pencil:  the pitted  plain of
 Fingolfin's fight.] The enchanting of Carcharos.                           
                                                                           
                                   XIII.                                    
                                                                           
              Into the vast and echoing gloom,                          3840
              more dread than many-tunnelled tomb                           
              in labyrinthine pyramid                                       
              where everlasting death is hid,                               
              down awful corridors that wind                                
              down to a menace dark enshrined;                          3845
              down to the mountain's roots profound,                        
              devoured, tormented, bored and ground                         
              by seething vermin spawned of stone;                          
              down to the depths they went alone.                           
               The arch behind of twilit shade                          3850
              they saw recede and dwindling fade;                           
              the thunderous forges' rumour grew,                           
              a burning wind there roaring blew                             
              foul vapours up from gaping holes.                            

 Huge shapes there stood like carven trolls      3855
 enormous hewn of blasted rock                        
 to forms that mortal likeness mock;                  
 monstrous and menacing, entombed,                    
 at every turn they silent loomed                     
                                                     
 in fitful glares that leaped and died.           3860
                                                     
 There hammers clanged, and tongues there cried       
 with sound like smitten stone; there wailed          
 faint from far under, called and failed              
 amid the iron clink of chain                         
 voices of captives put to pain.                 3865
                                                     
 Loud rose a din of laughter hoarse,                  
 self-loathing yet without remorse;                   
 loud came a singing harsh and fierce                 
 like swords of terror souls to pierce.               
 Red was the glare through open doors             3870
 of firelight mirrored on brazen floors,              
 and up the arches towering clomb                     
 to glooms unguessed, to vaulted dome                 
 swathed in wavering smokes and steams                
 stabbed with flickering lightning-gleams.        3875
 To Morgoth's hall, where dreadful feast              
 he held, and drank the blood of beast                
 and lives of Men, they stumbling came:               
 their eyes were dazed with smoke and flame.          
 The pillars, reared like monstrous shores        3880
 to bear earth's overwhelming floors,                 
 were devil-carven, shaped with skill                 
 such as unholy dreams doth fill:                     
 they towered like trees into the air,                
 whose trunks are rooted in despair,              3885
 whose shade is death, whose fruit is bane,           
 whose boughs like serpents writhe in pain.           
 Beneath them ranged with spear and sword             
 stood Morgoth's sable-armoured horde:                
 the fire on blade and boss of shield             3890
 was red as blood on stricken field.                  
 Beneath a monstrous column loomed                    
 the throne of Morgoth, and the doomed                
 and dying gasped upon the floor:                     
 his hideous footstool, rape of war.              3895

 About him sat his awful thanes,              
 the Balrog-lords with fiery manes,           
 redhanded, mouthed with fangs of steel;      
 devouring wolves were crouched at heel.      
 And o'er the host of hell there shone    3900
 with a cold radiance, clear and wan,         
 the Silmarils, the gems of fate,             
 emprisoned in the crown of hate.             
                                             
 Lo! through the grinning portals dread       
 sudden a shadow swooped and fled;        3905
 and Beren gasped - he lay alone,             
 with crawling belly on the stone:            
 a form bat-winged, silent, flew              
 where the huge pillared branches grew,       
 amid the smokes and mounting steams.     3910
 And as on the margin of dark dreams          
 a dim-felt shadow unseen grows               
 to cloud of vast unease, and woes            
 foreboded, nameless, roll like doom          
 upon the soul, so in that gloom          3915
 the voices fell, and laughter died           
 slow to silence many-eyed.                   
 A nameless doubt, a shapeless fear,          
 had entered in their caverns drear,          
 and.grew, and towered above them cowed,  3920
 hearing in heart the trumpets loud           
 of gods forgotten. Morgoth spoke,            
 and thunderous the silence broke:            
 'Shadow, descend! And do not think           
 to cheat mine eyes! In vain to shrink    3925
 from thy Lord's gaze, or seek to hide.       
 My will by none may be defied.               
 Hope nor escape doth here await              
 those that unbidden pass my gate.            
 Descend! ere anger blast thy wing,       3930
 thou foolish, frail, bat-shapen thing,       
 and yet not bat within! Come down! '         
                                             
   Slow-wheeling o'er his iron crown,         
 reluctantly, shivering and small,            
 Beren there saw the shadow fall,         3935
 and droop before the hideous throne,         

 a weak and trembling thing, alone.             
 And as thereon great Morgoth bent              
 his darkling gaze, he shuddering went,         
 belly to earth, the cold sweat dank        3940
 upon his fell, and crawling shrank             
 beneath the darkness of that seat,             
 beneath the shadow of those feet.              
                                               
   Tinuviel spake, a shrill, thin, sound        
 piercing those silences profound:          3945
 'A lawful errand here me brought;              
 from Thu's dark mansions have I sought,        
 from Taur-na-Fuin's shade I fare               
 to stand before thy mighty chair! '            
                                               
 'Thy name, thou shrieking waif, thy name!  3950
 Tidings enough from Thu there came             
 but short while since. What would he now?      
 Why send such messenger as thou? '             
                                               
 'Thuringwethil I am, who cast                  
 a shadow o'er the face aghast              3955
 of the sallow moon in the doomed land          
 of shivering Beleriand.'                       
                                               
   'Liar  art thou,  who shalt  not weave       
 deceit  before  mine  eyes.   Now  leave       
 thy  form and  raiment false,  and stand   3960
 revealed,  and delivered  to my  hand! '       
                                               
 There came a slow and shuddering change:       
 the batlike raiment dark and strange           
 was loosed, and slowly shrank and fell         
 quivering. She stood revealed in hell.     3965
 About her slender shoulders hung               
 her shadowy hair, and round her clung          
 her garment dark, where glimmered pale         
 the starlight caught in magic veil.            
 Dim dreams and faint oblivious sleep       3970
 fell softly thence, in dungeons deep           
 an odour stole of elven-flowers                
 from elven-dells where silver showers          
 drip softly through the evening air;           
 and round there crawled with greedy stare  3975
 dark shapes of snuffling hunger dread.         

  With arms upraised and drooping head             
 then softly she began to sing                     
 a theme of sleep and slumbering,                  
 wandering, woven with deeper spell          3980
 than songs wherewith in ancient dell              
 Melian did once the twilight fill,                
 profound, and fathomless, and still.              
                                                  
 The fires of Angband flared and died,             
 smouldered into darkness; through the wide  3985
 and hollow halls there rolled unfurled            
 the shadows of the underworld.                    
 All movement stayed, and all sound ceased,        
 save vaporous breath of Orc and beast.            
 One fire in darkness still abode:           3990
 the lidless eyes of Morgoth glowed;               
 one sound the breathing silence broke:            
 the mirthless voice of Morgoth spoke.             
                                                  
  'So Luthien, so Luthien,                         
 a liar like all Elves and Men!              3995
 Yet welcome, welcome, to my hall!                 
 I have a use for every thrall.                    
 What news of Thingol in his hole                  
 shy lurking like a timid vole?                    
 What folly fresh is in his mind,            4.000
 who cannot keep his offspring blind               
 from straying thus? or can devise                 
 no better counsel for his spies? '                
                                                  
  She wavered, and she stayed her song.            
 'The road,' she said, 'was wild and long,   4005
 but Thingol sent me not, nor knows                
 what way his rebellious daughter goes.            
 Yet every road and path will lead                 
 Northward at last, and here of need               
 I trembling come with humble brow,          4010
 and here before thy throne I bow;                 
 for Luthien hath many arts                        
 for solace sweet of kingly hearts.'               
                                                  
 'And here of need thou shalt remain               
 now, Luthien, in joy or pain -              4015
 or pain, the fitting doom for all,                

                                            
                                                 
 for rebel, thief, and upstart thrall.            
 Why should ye not in our fate share              
 of woe and travail? Or should I spare            
 to slender limb and body frail               4020
 breaking torment? Of what avail                  
 here dost thou deem thy babbling song            
 and foolish laughter? Minstrels strong           
 are at my call. Yet I will give                  
 a respite brief, a while to live,            4025
 a little while, though purchased dear,           
 to Luthien the fair and clear,                   
 a pretty toy for idle hour.                      
 In slothful gardens many a flower                
 like thee the amorous gods are used          4030
 honey-sweet to kiss, and cast then bruised,      
 their fragrance loosing, under feet.             
 But here we seldom find such sweet               
 amid our labours long and hard,                  
 from godlike idleness debarred.              4035
 And who would not taste the honey-sweet          
 lying to lips, or crush with feet                
 the soft cool tissue of pale flowers,            
 easing like gods the dragging hours?             
 A! curse the Gods! 0 hunger dire,            4040
 0 blinding thirst's unending fire!               
 One moment shall ye cease, and slake             
 your sting with morsel I here take! '            
                                                 
 In his eyes the fire to flame was fanned,        
 and forth he stretched his brazen hand.      4045
 Luthien as shadow shrank aside.                  
 'Not thus, 0 king! Not thus! ' she cried,        
 'do great lords hark to humble boon!             
 For every minstrel hath his tune;                
 and some are strong and some are soft,       4050
 and each would bear his song aloft,              
 and each a little while be heard,                
 though rude the note, and light the word.        
 But Luthien hath cunning arts                    
 for solace sweet of kingly hearts.           4055
 Now hearken! ' And her wings she caught          
 then deftly up, and swift as thought             

         
                                                     
 slipped from his grasp, and wheeling round,          
 fluttering before his eyes, she wound                
 a mazy-winged dance, and sped                 4060
 about his iron-crowned head.                         
 Suddenly her song began anew;                        
 and soft came dropping like a dew                    
 down from on high in that domed hall                 
 her voice bewildering, magical,                 4065
 and grew to silver-murmuring streams                 
 pale falling in dark pools in dreams.                
                                                     
 She let her flying raiment sweep,                    
 enmeshed with woven spells of sleep,                 
 as round the dark void she ranged and reeled. 4070
 From wall to wall she turned and wheeled             
 in dance such as never Elf nor fay                   
 before devised, nor since that day;                  
 than swallow swifter, than flittermouse          
 in dying light round darkened house           4075
 more silken-soft, more strange and fair              
 than sylphine maidens of the Air                     
 whose wings in Varda's heavenly hall                 
 in rhythmic movement beat and fall.                  
 Down crumpled Orc, and Balrog proud;          4080            
 all eyes were quenched, all heads were bowed;        
 the fires of heart and maw were stilled,             
 and ever like a bird she thrilled                    
 above a lightless world forlorn                      
 in ecstasy enchanted borne.                     4085
                                                     
 All eyes were quenched, save those that glared       
 in Morgoth's lowering brows, and stared              
 in slowly wandering wonder round,                    
 and slow were in enchantment bound.                  
 Their will wavered, and their fire failed,      4090
 and as beneath his brows they paled,                 
 the Silmarils like stars were kindled                
 that in the reek of Earth had dwindled               
 escaping upwards clear to shine,                     
 glistening marvellous in heaven's mine.         4095
                                                     
  Then flaring suddenly they fell,                    
 down, down upon the floors of hell.                  
 The dark and mighty head was bowed;                  

 like mountain-top beneath a cloud                     
 the shoulders foundered, the vast form         410O
 crashed, as in overwhelming storm                     
 huge cliffs in ruin slide and fall;                   
 and prone lay Morgoth in his hall.                    
 His crown there rolled upon the ground,               
 a wheel of thunder; then all sound             4105
 died, and a silence grew as deep                      
 as were the heart of Earth asleep.                    
                                                      
 Beneath the vast and empty throne                     
 the adders lay like twisted stone,                    
 the wolves like corpses foul were strewn;      4110
 and there lay Beren deep in swoon:                    
 no thought, no dream nor shadow blind                 
 moved in the darkness of his mind.                    
 'Come forth, come forth! The hour hath knelled,       
                                                      
 and Angband's mighty lord is felled!     4115         
                                                      
 Awake, awake! For we two meet                         
 alone before the aweful seat.'                        
 This voice came down into the deep                    
 where he lay drowned in wells of sleep;               
 a hand flower-soft and flower-cool              4120
 passed o'er his face, and the still pool              
 of slumber quivered. Up then leaped                   
 his mind to waking; forth he crept.                   
 The wolvish fell he flung aside                       
 and sprang unto his feet, and wide             4125
 staring amid the soundless gloom                      
 he gasped as one living shut in tomb.                 
 There to his side he felt her shrink,                 
 felt Luthien now shivering sink,                      
 her strength and magic dimmed and spent,       4130
 and swift his arms about her went.                    
                                                      
 Before his feet he saw amazed                         
 the gems of Feanor, that blazed                       
 with white fire glistening in the crown               
 of Morgoth's might now fallen down.             4135
 To move that helm of iron vast                        
 no strength he found, and thence aghast               
 he strove with fingers mad to wrest                   
 the guerdon of their hopeless quest,                  

 till in his heart there fell the thought       4140
 of that cold morn whereon he fought                
 with Curufin; then from his belt                   
 the sheathless knife he drew, and knelt,           
 and tried its hard edge, bitter-cold,              
 o'er which in Nogrod songs had rolled          4145
 of dwarvish armourers singing slow                 
 to hammer-music long ago.                          
 Iron as tender wood it clove                       
 and mail as woof of loom it rove.                  
 The claws of iron that held the gem,           4150
 it bit them through and sundered them;             
 a Silmaril he clasped and held,                    
 and the pure radiance slowly welled                
 red glowing through the clenching flesh.           
 Again he stooped and strove afresh             4155
 one more of the holy jewels three                  
 that Feanor wrought of yore to free.               
 But round those fires was woven fate:              
 not yet should they leave the halls of hate.       
 The dwarvish steel of cunning blade            4160
 by treacherous smiths of Nogrod made               
 snapped; then ringing sharp and clear              
 in twain it sprang, and like a spear               
 or errant shaft the brow it grazed                 
 of Morgoth's sleeping head, and dazed          4165
 their hearts with fear. For Morgoth groaned        
 with voice entombed, like wind that moaned         
 in hollow caverns penned and bound.                
 There came a breath; a gasping sound               
 moved through the halls, as Orc and beast      4I70
 turned in their dreams of hideous feast;           
 in sleep uneasy Balrogs stirred,                   
 and far above was faintly heard                    
 an echo that in tunnels rolled,                    
 a wolvish howling long and cold.               4175
                                                   
                       *                            

                             NOTES.                                          
                                                                            
 3840.  At the beginning of the Canto is written the date 'Oct. I 1930'.     
        The previous date was 30 Sept. 1930 at line 3790.                    
 3860.  With this line the B typescript comes to an end, and the text        
        continues to the end in fine manuscript.                             
 3881.  This line is dated 'Sept. 14 193 I . The previous date was x Oct.
        I930 at line 3840.                                                   
 3887.  This line is dated 'Sept. 15' (1931).                                
 3947.  Late change in B: from Sauron's mansions hare I sought.See           
        p. 232, note to lines 2064 - 6.                                      
 3951.  Late change in B: Tidings enough from Sauron came.                   
 3954.  In the margin of B is written against Thuringwethil, at the          
        time of the writing out of the text, 'sc. she of hidden shadow'.     
 3957.  Beleriand A and B (i.e. not Broseliand emended).                     
 3962. This line is dated 'Sep. 16 1931'.                                 
        magic > elvish in B, but this is doubtless a late change, when       
        my father no longer used this once favourite word.                   
 4029.  Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 14', duplicating that
        given to line 3881.                                                  
 4045.  Against this line is written the date 'Sep. 16', duplicating that
        given to line 3962.                                                  
 4085.  After this line is written the last date in the A manuscript,        
        'Sept. 17 1931'.                                                     
 4092-3. These lines were written in the margin of B, but the original        
        lines:                                                               
                                                                            
             the Silmarils were lit like stars                               
             that fume of Earth upreeking mars                               
                                                                            
         were not struck out.                                                
 4163-6.  A: in twain it sprang; and quaking fear                            
                  fell on their hearts, for Morgoth groaned                  
                                                                            
                           Commentary on Canto XIII.                         
                                                                            
 There is not much to be  learnt from  the Synopses  concerning this  part of
 the narrative,  but the  Angband scene  was never  greatly changed  from its
 original form in the Tale of Tinuviel (II. 31 ff.). Synopsis I is at the end
 reduced to mere headings, II has given out, and IV does not deal  with the
 entry into Angband. III, given on pp. 293 - 4 as far as the enchantment of
 Carcharoth, continues:                                                      
                                                                            
   After  endless  wanderings  in  corridors  they  stumble  into  the  pres-
 ence  of  Morgoth.  Morgoth  speaks. 'Who  art thou  that flittest  about my
 halls as a bat,  but art  not a  bat? Thou  dost not  belong here,  nor wert
 thou   summoned.   Who   has   ever   come   here  unsummoned?   None!  "But

   I   was   summoned.   I   am   Luthien   daughter   of  Thingol.'   Then  Morgoth
   laughed,  but  he  was  moved  with  suspicion,  and   said  that   her  accursed
   race  would  get  no  soft  words  or  favour  in  Angband.  What  could  she  do
   to  give  him  pleasure,  and  save   herself  from   the  lowest   dungeons?  He
   reached  out  his  mighty  brazen  hand  but  she  shrank   away.  He   is  angry
   but she offers to dance.                                                             
      [The   remainder   of   the   outline  is   in  pencil   and  in   places  in-
   decipherable:]  She  lets  fall  her   bat-garb.  Her   hair  falls   about.  The
   lights   of   Angband   die.   Impenetrable   dark  falls:   only  the   eyes  of
   Morgoth    and    the    faint    glimmer    of     Tinuviel..............    Her
   fragrance  causes  all  to  draw  near greedily.  Tinuviel flies  [? in  at] door
   leaving Beren struck with horror.............                                        
                                                                                       
     Here this outline ends. Morgoth's words 'Who art thou that flittest about
     my halls as a bat' occur also in the Tale of Tinuviel (II. 32) - this outline
     several times adopts directly the wording of the Tale, see pp. 283, 294.
     This is a curious point, for in the Tale Tinuviel was not attired in a
     bat-skin, whereas in Synopsis III she was. It is conceivable that Melko's
         words actually gave rise to this element in the story.
         In the Tale Tinuviel lied to Melko, saying that Tinwelint her father
         had driven her out, and in reply he said that she need not hope for 'soft
         words'- this too is a phrase that recurs in Synopsis I I I. But the remainder
         of this outline does not relate closely to the Tale.
                   Synopsis V is here very brief. After 'the enchanting of Carcharos'
            (p. 294) it has only (still under the heading 'r r '):
                                                                                       
               The cozening of Morgoth and the rape of the Silmaril.                    
         The dwarvish knife of Curufin breaks.                                          
                                                                                       
                 It is clear that the concluding passage of Synopsis III, given above,
                 was a direct precursor of Canto XIII; but some elements - and actual
                 wording - in the scene go back to the Tale without being mentioned in
               the Synopsis. Luthien's words 'his rebellious daughter' (4007) seem to
                 echo 'he is an overbearing Elf and I give not my love at his command'
   (II. 32); there is a clear relation between the words of the Tale (ibid.).
                                                                                       
   Then did Tinuviel begin such a dance as neither she nor other sprite or              
   fay or elf danced ever before or has done since                                      
                                                                                       
   and lines 4072 - 3                                                                  
                                                                                       
                            in dance such as never Elf nor fay                          
                            before devised, nor since that day;                         
                                                                                       
 and  with  'the  adders  lay  like  twisted  stone' (4109)  cf. 'Beneath  his chair
 the adders  lay  like  stones.'  It  is interesting  to see  the idea  of the  shard of
 the  knife-blade   striking   Morgoth's   brow    (in?he   Silmarillion    his   cheek)
 emerging  in  the  composition  of  this  Canto;  as  first   written  (see   note  to
 lines 4163 - 6) it seems to have been the sound of the knife snapping that

  disturbed the sleepers, as it was expressly in  the Tale  (II. 33).  With the
  'treacherous  smiths  of  Nogrod'  (4161)  who made  Curufin's knife  cf. the
  passage  in  The  Children  of  Hurin  concerning  the  bearded   Dwarves  of
  troth  unmindful  who  made  the  knife  of  Flinding  that slipped  from its
  sheath (p.44, lines 1142 ff.): that was  made by  the Dwarves  of Belegost,
  and like Curufin's                                                           
                                                                              
                [its] edge would eat through iron noiseless                    
                as a clod of clay is cleft by the share.                       
                                                                              
    The account in The Silmarillion (pp.  180 -  x) is  clearly based  on Canto
  XIII, from  which it  derives many  features, though  it is  reduced, notably
  by  compressing  the  two  episodes  of  Luthien  singing  (3977ff., 4062ff.)
  into one; and the prose here owes less to the verses than in other places.
    Luthien's  naming  herself   Thuringwethil  to   Morgoth  (line   3954)  is
  notable.  In  The  Silmarillion  (p.  178)  the  bat-fell which  Huan brought
  from  Tol-in-Gaurhoth  was  that  of  Thuringwethil.  "she was  the messenger
  of Sauron, and was  wont to  fly in  vampire's form  to Angband',  whereas in
  the Lay (lines 3402 ff.), as I have noticed (p. 284), 'the bat-wings are only
  said to be such as bear up Thu's messengers,  and are  not associated  with a
  particular or chief messenger'.  It seems  possible that  in the  Lay Luthien
  devised  this  name ('she  of hidden  shadow') as  a riddling  description of
  herself, and that this led to the  conception of  the bat-messenger  from the
  Wizard's  Isle  to  Angband  named Thuringwethil;  but there  is no  proof of
  this.                                                                        
    With the                                                                   
                                                                              
                             sylphine maidens of the Air                       
                     whose wings in Varda's heavenly hall                      
                     in rhythmic movement beat and fall  (4077 9)               
                                                                              
  cf.  the  tale  of  The  Coming  of  the  Valar and  the Building  of Valinor
  (I. 65 - 6), where it is said  that with  Manwe and  Varda there  entered the
  world  'many  of  those  lesser  Vali  who  loved  them  and had  played nigh
  them and  attuned their  music to  theirs, and  these are  the Manir  and the
  Suruli, the sylphs of the airs and of the winds'.                            
                                                                              
                                       *                                       
                                                                              
                                      XIV.                                     
                                                                              
               Up through the dark and echoing gloom                           
               as ghosts from many-tunnelled tomb,                             
               up from the mountains' roots profound                           
               and the vast menace underground,                                
               their limbs aquake with deadly fear,                       4180

                                                
                                                   
 terror in eyes, and dread in ear,                  
 together Red they, by the beat                     
 affrighted of their flying feet.                   
                                                   
 At last before them far away                       
 they saw the glimmering wraith of day,        4185
 the mighty archway of the gate -                   
 and there a horror new did wait.                   
 Upon the threshold, watchful, dire,                
 his eyes new-kindled with dull fire,               
 towered Carcharoth, a biding doom:           4190
 his jaws were gaping like a tomb,                  
 his teeth were bare, his tongue aflame;            
 aroused he watched that no one came,               
 no flitting shade nor hunted shape,                
 seeking from Angband to escape.              4195
 Now past that guard what guile or might            
 could thrust from death into the light?            
                                                   
 He heard afar their hurrying feet,                 
 he snuffed an odour strange and sweet;             
 he smelled their coming long before          4200
 they marked the waiting threat at door.            
 His limbs he stretched and shook off sleep,        
 then stood at gaze. With sudden leap               
 upon them as they sped he sprang,                  
 and his howling in the arches rang.          4205
   Too swift for thought his onset came,            
 too swift for any spell to tame;                   
 and Beren desperate then aside                     
 thrust Luthien, and forth did stride               
 unarmed, defenceless to defend               4210
 Tinuviel until the end.                            
 With left he caught at hairy throat,               
 with right hand at the eyes he smote -             
 his right, from which the radiance welled          
 of the holy Silmaril he held.                4215
 As gleam of swords in fire there flashed           
 the fangs of Carcharoth, and crashed               
 together like a trap, that tore                    
 the hand about the wrist, and shore                
 through brittle bone and sinew nesh,         4220
 devouring the frail mortal flesh;                  

          and in that cruel  mouth unclean                                       
          engulfed the jewel's holy sheen.                                       
                                                                                
                               The Unwritten Cantos.                             
                                                                                
 There was virtually  no change  in the  narrative from  the Tale  to the  Lay in
 the  opening  passage  of  Canto  XIV,  but  the account  in The  Silmarillion '
 differs, in that there Beren did not strike  at the  eyes of  the wolf  with his
 right  hand  holding  the  Silmaril,  but  held the  jewel up  before Carcharoth
 to daunt  him. My  father intended  to alter  the Lay  here, as  is seen  from a
 marginal direction to introduce the element of 'daunting'.                      
                                                                                
  The Lay of Leithian ends here, in both the A and B texts, and also in          
 the pages of rough draft, but an isolated sheet found elsewhere gives a         
 few further lines, together with variants, in the first stage of composition:
                                                                                
          Against the wall then Beren reeled                                     
          but still with his left he sought to shield                            
          fair Luthien, who cried aloud                                          
          to see his pain, and down she bowed                                    
          in anguish sinking to the ground.                                      
                                                                                
 There is also a short passage, found on a separate sheet at the end of the      
                                                                                
 B-text, which is headed 'a piece from the end of the poem'.                     
                                                                                
          Where the forest-stream went through the wood,                         
          and silent all the stems there stood                                   
          of tall trees, moveless, hanging dark                                  
          with mottled shadows on their bark                                     
          above the green and gleaming river,                                5
          there came through leaves a sudden shiver,                             
          a windy whisper through the still                                      
          cool silences; and down the hill,                                      
          as faint as a deep sleeper's breath,                                   
          an echo came as cold as death:                                     10
          'Long are the paths, of shadow made                                    
          where no foot's print is ever laid,                                    
          over the hills, across the seas!                                       
          Far, far away are the Lands of Ease,                                   
          but the Land of the Lost is further yet,                          15
          where the Dead wait, while ye forget.                                  
          No moon is there, no voice, no sound                                   
          of beating heart; a sigh profound                                      
          once in each age as each age dies                                      
          alone is heard. Far, far it lies,                                 20

        the Land of Waiting where the Dead sit,                               
        in their thought's shadow, by no moon lit.                            
                                                                             
 With the last lines compare the passage at the end of the  tale of  Beren and
 Luthien in The Silmarillion (p. 186):                                      
                                                                             
  But  Luthien  came  to  the  halls  of  Mandos,   which  are   the  appointed
  places  of  the  Eldalie,  beyond  the   mansions  of   the  West   upon  the
  confines of  the world.  There those  that wait  sit in  the shadow  of their
  thought.                                                                    
                                                                             
  There is  nothing else,  and I  do not  think that  there ever  was anything
 else. All my father's later work on the poem was devoted  to the  revision of
 what was already in existence; and the Lay of Leithian ends here.            
                                  *                                          
  Of the five synopses that  have been  given in  sections in  previous pages,
 only  the  fifth  bears  on  the escape  of Beren  and Luthien  from Angband.
 This outline was  last quoted  on p.  305 ('the  dwarvish knife  of Curufin
 breaks'). It continues:                                                      
                                                                             
  Beren  and  Luthien  flee  in fear.  Arousing of  Carcharos. Beren's  hand is
  bitten  off  in  which  he   holds  the   Silmaril.  Madness   of  Carcharos.
  Angband  awakes.  Flight  of  Beren  and  Luthien   towards  the   waters  of
  Sirion. Canto [i.e. Canto x x, see p. 305] ends  as they  hear the  pursuing
  wolves  behind.  Wrapped  in  Luthien's  cloak they  flit beneath  the stars.
                                                                             
 Thus the rescue  of Beren  and Luthien  by Thorondor  and his  vassals was
 not yet present, and the story was still in this respect unchanged from the
 Tale of Tinuviel (II. 34); cf. especially:                              
                                                                             
  Tinuviel  wrapped  part  of-her  dark  mantle  about  Beren,  and  so  for  a
  while  flitting  by dusk  and dark  amid the  hills they  were seen  by none.
                                                                             
  The  first  record  of  the  changed  story  of the  escape from  Angband is
 found on an isolated slip, written hastily  in pencil  and very  difficult to
 decipher:                                                                    
                                                                             
  Carcharoth  goes mad  and drives  all [? orcs]  before him  like a  wind. The
  sound  of  his awful  howling causes  rocks to  split and  fall. There  is an
  earthquake   underground.   Morgoth's   wrath   on   waking.    The   gateway
  [?falls]  in  and  hell is  blocked, and  great fires  and smokes  burst from
  Thangorodrim.   Thunder   and   lightning.  Beren   lies  dying   before  the
  gate.  Tinuviel's  song  as  she  kisses  his  hand  and  prepares   to  die.
  Thorondor   comes   down   and   bears   them   amid   the   lightning   that
  [?stabs]  at them  like spears  and a  hail of  arrows from  the battlements.
  They  pass  above  Gondolin  and  Luthien  sees  the  white  city  far below,
  [?gleaming]  like  a  lily  in  the  valley.  Thorondor  sets  her   down  in
  Brethil.                                                                    

                                                                               
                                                                               
   This is very close in narrative structure to the story in The Silmarillion
   (p. 182), with the earthquake, fire and smoke from Thangorodrim,             
   Beren's lying near death at the Gate, Luthien's kissing his hand (staunch-
   ing the wound), the descent of Thorondor, and the passage of the             
   eagle(s) over Gondolin. This last shows that this brief outline is rela-     
   tively late, since Gondolin was already in existence before the Battle of '
   Unnumbered Tears (II.208). But in this text they are set down in             
   Brethil (a name that does not appear in the works until several years        
   later); in The Silmarillion they are set down 'upon the borders of           
   Doriath', in 'that same dell whence Beren had stolen in despair and left     
   Luthien asleep'. - On the reference to Gondolin as 'a lily in the valley' see
   I. 172.                                                                      
                                                                               
       Synopsis  V  has more  to tell  subsequently of  the wanderings  of Beren
   and  Luthien  before  they  returned  to  Doriath,  but  I  now  set  out the
   remaining  materials  in  their  entirety  before  commenting on  them. First
   it  is  convenient  to  cite the  end of  Synopsis II,  which has  been given
   already (p. 270):                                                            
                                                                               
            Celegorm's embassy to Thingol so that Thingol knows or thinks he
       knows Beren dead and Luthien in Nargothrond.                             
          Why Celegorm and Curufin hated by Thingol as p. 270 ..                
          The loss of Dairon.                                                   
                                                                               
   Synopsis I V has been given (p. 273) only as far  as 'They  prepare to  go to
   Angband',  since the  outline then  turns away  from the  story of  Beren and
   Luthien  themselves, according  to my  father's projection  at that  time for
   the further course of the Lay, and continues as follows:                     
                                     11.                                          
         Doriath.  The  hunt  for  Luthien  and  the  loss  of  Dairon.  War  on the
       borders.  Boldog  slain.   So  Thingol   knows  Luthien   not  yet   dead  is
       caught,  but  fears  that  Boldog's  raid  means  that  Morgoth has  got wind
       of  her  wandering.  Actually  it  means  no  more  than  the  legend  of her
       beauty.                                                                  
         An   embassy   comes   from   Celegorm.  Thingol   learns  that   Beren  is
       dead,  and  Luthien  at  Nargothrond.  He  is  roused to  wrath by  the hints
       of  the  letter  that Celegorm  will leave  Felagund to  die, and  will usurp
       the  throne  of  Nargothrond.  And   so  Thingol   had  better   let  Luthien
       stay where she is.                                                       
         Thingol  prepares   an  army   to  go   against  Nargothrond,   but  learns
       that  Luthien  has  left,  and  Celegorm  and  Curufin  have  fled  to Aglon.
       He  sends  an  embassy  to  Aglon.  It  is routed  and put  to flight  by the
       sudden  onslaught  of  Carcharas.  Mablung  escapes  to  tell  the  tale. The
       devastation of Doriath by Carcharas.                                     

                                      12.                                  
                                                                          
      The rape of the Silmaril and the home-coming of Beren and Luthien.
                                                                          
                                      13.                                  
                                                                          
 The wolf-hunt and death of Huan and Beren.                                
                                                                          
                                    I4.                                    
                                                                          
 The recall of Beren and Huan.                                             
                                                                          
 Synopsis V  continues as  a more  substantial preparation  for the  end of
 the poem never to be written, which my father at  this stage  conceived in
 three further Cantos.                                                     
                                                                          
                                    12.                                    
                                                                          
   Sorrow  in  Doriath  at  flight  of  Luthien.  Thingol's  heart hardened
 against  Beren,  despite  words  of   Melian.  A   mighty  hunt   is  made
 throughout the realm,  but many  of the  folk strayed  north and  west and
 south  of  Doriath  beyond  the  magic  of  Melian  and were  lost. Dairon
 became  separated  from  his  comrades  and  wandered  away into  the East
 of the world, where some say he pipes yet seeking Luthien in vain.        
   The  embassy  of  Celegorm  tells  Thingol   that  Beren   and  Felagund
 are  dead,  that  Celegorm  will  make  himself king  of Narog,  and while
 telling  him  that Luthien  is safe  in Nargothrond  and treating  for her
 hand, hints that she will not return: it also warns him to trouble not the
 matter of the Silmarils. Thingol is wroth - and is  moved to  think better
 of  Beren,  while  yet  blaming  [him]  for  the  woes  that  followed his
 coming to Doriath, and most for loss of Dairon.                           
   Thingol  arms  for  war   against  Celegorm.   Melian  says   she  would
 forbid this evil war of Elf with Elf, but that  never shall  Thingol cross
 blade  with  Celegorm. Thingol's  army meets  with the  host of  Boldog on
 the  borders  of  Doriath.  Morgoth has  heard of  the beauty  of Luthien,
 and  the  rumour of  her wandering.  He has  ordered Thu  and the  Orcs to
 capture her. A battle is fought and  Thingol is  victorious. The  Orcs are
 driven  into  Taur-na-Fuin   or  slain   Thingol  himself   slays  Boldog.
 Mablung  Heavyhand  was  Thingol's  chief  warrior   and  fought   at  his
 side; Beleg  was the  chief of  his scouts.  Though victorious  Thingol is
 filled  with  still  more disquiet  at Morgoth's  hunt for  Luthien. Beleg
 goes  forth  from  the  camp  on  Doriath's  borders and  journeys, unseen
 by the archers, to Narog. He brings tidings of the flight of  Luthien, the
 rescue  of  Beren,  and  the  exile  of  Celegorm  and  Curufin.  He [read
 Thingol]   goes   home   and  sends   an  embassy   to  Aglon   to  demand
 recompense,  and  aid  in  the  rescue of  Luthien. He  renews his  vow to
 imprison Beren for  ever if  he does  not return  with a  Silmaril, though
 Melian warns him that he knows not what he says.                          

   The  embassy  meets  the  onslaught  of  Carcharos  who  by  fate   or  the
 power  of  the  Silmaril  bursts  into  Doriath.  All  perish   save  Mablung
 who  brings  the  news.  Devastation  of  the woods.  The wood-elves  flee to
 the caves.                                                                   
                                                                             
                                      13.                                     
                                                                             
   Beren   and   Luthien  escape   to  the   Shadowy  Mountains,   but  become
 lost  and  bewildered  in  the  dreads  of  Nan  Dungorthin,  and  are hunted
 by  phantoms,  and  snared  at  last  by  the  great  spiders.  Huan  rescues
 them,  and  guides  them  down  Sirion,  and  so  they  reach   Doriath  from
 the  south,  and  find  the  woods  silent and  empty till  they come  to the
 guarded bridge.                                                              
   Huan,   Beren,   and  Luthien   come  before   Thingol.  They   tell  their
 tale;  yet  Thingol  will  not relent.  The brave  words of  Beren, revealing
 the  mystery  of  Carcharos.  Thingol  relents.  The  wolf-hunt  is prepared.
 Huan,   Thingol,   Beren,   and   Mablung   depart.   Luthien   abides   with
 Melian  in  foreboding.  Carcharos  is  slain,  but  slew  Huan  who defended
 Beren. Yet Beren  is mortally  hurt, though  he lived  to place  the Silmaril
 on Thingol's hand which Mablung cut from the wolf's belly.                   
   The  meeting  and  farewell  of  Beren   and  Tinuviel   beneath  Hirilorn.
 Burial of Huan and Beren.                                                    
                                                                             
                                      14.                                     
                                                                             
   Fading of Luthien. Her journey to Mandos. The song of Luthien in           
 Mandos' halls, and the release of Beren. They dwelt long in Broseliand,      
 but   spake  never   more  to   mortal  Men,   and  Luthien   became  mortal.
                                                                             
 This  concludes  all  the  material in  the outlines.  For the  references to
     Boldog's raid, and Morgoth's interest in Luthien, in the Lay itself see
 lines 2127 - 36, 2686 - 94, 3198 - 3201, and 3665 - 75.                      
 In Synopsis IV (p. 310) Boldog's raid  takes place  earlier in  the story,
 before  the  coming  of  Celegorm's  embassy  to  Thingol, but  its narrative
 value is  obscure. It  is not  clear why  the raid  must inform  Thingol that
 'Luthien  not  yet  dead  is  caught',  nor  why  he  should   conclude  that
 'Morgoth  has  got  wind  of  her  wandering'.  Moreover  the  statement that
 'actually it  means no  more than  the legend  of her  beauty' can  only mean
 (if  Morgoth  had  not heard  of her  wandering forth  from Doriath)  that he
 sent out  Boldog's warband  with the  express intention  of seizing  her from
 the fastness of the Thousand Caves.                                          
 In Synopsis  V the  raid was  moved to  a later  point, and  the host  out of
 Doriath  that  destroyed  Boldog  was  actually  moving  against Nargothrond-
 In?he  Silmarillion  the  embassy  from  Celegorm  survived, but  of Boldog's
 raid there is no hint,  and Thingol  does no  more than  'think to  make war'
 on Nargothrond:                                                              

  But  Thingol  learned  that  Luthien  had journeyed  far from  Doriath, for
  messages  came  secretly  from  Celegorm,...   saying  that   Felagund  was
  dead,  and  Beren  was  dead,  but  Luthien  was  in Nargothrond,  and that
  Celegorm  would  wed  her.  Then   Thingol  was   wrathful,  and   he  sent
  forth  spies,  thinking  to  make  war  upon   Nargothrond;  and   thus  he
  learned  that  Luthien  was  again fled,  and  that  Celegorm  and  Curufin
  were  driven  from  Nargothrond.  Then  his  counsel was  in doubt,  for he
  had  not  the strength  to assail  the seven  sons of  Feanor; but  he sent
  messengers  to  Himring  to  summon  their  aid  in  seeking  for  Luthien,
  since Celegorm had not sent  her to  the house  of her  father, nor  had he
  kept her safely (pp. 183 - 4).                                            
                                                                           
  The 'spies' of this  passage were  derived from  Beleg's secret  mission to
  Nargothrond in Synopsis V (p.  311).  It seems  probable that  my father
  actually discarded Boldog's raid; and  with it  went all  suggestion that
  Luthien's wandering had been reported  to Morgoth  (cf. lines  3665 ff.)
  and that Thu  was given  orders to  capture her  (Synopsis V).  The passage
  in Canto IX of  the Lay  (2686 - 94) where  Thu recognised  Luthien's voice
  - or,  at least,  knew that  it must  be she  who was  singing -  does not,
  indeed, at all suggest that Thu was actively seeking her. These  lines were
  the  source  for  the  passage  in The Silmarillion, where  Sauron standing
  in the tower of Tol-in-Gaurhoth                                           
                                                                           
  smiled  hearing  her  voice,  for  he  knew  that it  was the  daughter of
  Melian.  The  fame  of  the  beauty  of  Luthien,  and  the wonder  of her
  song  had  long  gone  forth  from  Doriath;  and he  thought to  make her
  captive  and  hand  her'  over  to the  power of  Morgoth, for  his reward
  would be great.                                                           
                                                                           
  But the idea that the beauty and singing of Luthien had come to the ears
  of Sauron survives from the stage when Morgoth's interest in her was an
  important motive.
   As noticed earlier (p. 209), the wandering and loss of Dairon goes back
  to the Tale of Tinuviel (11. 20 - 1) and survived into The Silmarillion
  (p. 183), where it is said that Daeron passed over the Blue Mountains
  'into the East of Middle-earth, where for many ages he made lament
  beside dark waters for Luthien'. Less is made in the later story of the
  great hunt for Luthien, and nothing is said of the changing moods and
  intentions of Thingol towards Beren referred to in Synopsis V. The
  'political' element of the ambitions of Celegorm and Curufin and the
  attempted browbeating and blackmail of Thingol is of course a new
 element that first appears in the Synopses (other than the earlier refer-
 ence in the Lay, 2501-3 to the brothers' intentions in this regard), since
  the 'Nargothrond Element' is wholly absent from the Tale of Tinuviel;
  and similarly the interception of the embassy from Thingol to Aglon by
  Carcharoth, from which Mablung alone survived. This also remains in
  The Silmarillion.

    In Synopsis V, where the bearing away of Beren and Luthien from             
  Angband by Thorondor is not yet present, they flee from Angband               
  'towards the waters of Sirion' (p. 309), and (p. 312) 'escape to the        
  Shadowy Mountains, but become lost and bewildered in the dreads of,           
  Nan Dungorthin, and are hunted by phantoms, and snared at last by the         
  great spiders. Huan rescues them, and guides them down Sirion...' .           
  In the Tale likewise (II. 34 - 5), Huan rescued them from 'Nan                 
  Dumgorthin'. This is a point of geography and shifting nomenclature of        
  great perplexity. I have shown (pp. 170-I, 234) that the meaning of           
  'Shadowy Mountains' changes in the course of the Lay of Leithian:             
  whereas at first (lines 386, 1318) the reference is to the Mountains          
  of Terror (Ered Gorgoroth), subsequently (line 1940) it is to Ered            
  Wethrin, the range fencing Hithlum. The Mountains of Terror, with the ?      
  great spiders, are described in lines 563 ff.                                 
    In the present passage of Synopsis V the statements that Beren and          
  Luthien escaping from Angband fled towards Sirion, and that Huan              
  rescuing them from Nan Dungorthin guided them down Sirion, very               
  strongly suggests that the Shadowy Mountains are here again, as might         
  be expected, Ered Wethrin. Nan Dungorthin must then be placed as in           
  The Children of Hurin, west of Sirion, in a valley of the southern slopes
  of the Shadowy Mountains. But this means that the great spiders are           
  found in both places.                                                         
    It is difficult to suggest a satisfactory explanation of this. A possibility
  is that when Beren crossed the Mountains of Terror and encountered the        
  spiders (lines 569 - 74) 'Nan Dungorthin' was placed in that region,          
  though it is not named; in Synopsis V however it is again placed, with its
  spiders, west of Sirion.                                                      
    In the later story the eagles set Beren and Luthien down on the borders     
  of Doriath, and Huan came to them there.                                      
    In the conclusion of Synopsis V there is very little that is at variance
  with the story of the wolf-hunt and the death of Beren in The Silmaril-       
  lion, so far as can be seen from the very compressed outline; but Beleg       
  was not present at the hunt in the Synopsis, as he was not in the Tale        
  (II. 38).                                                                     
                                                                               
    The  sentence  that  concludes  Synopsis  IV  is  curious:  'The  recall  of
  Beren  and  Huan'  (p.  311).  'Recall'  obviously refers  to the  return from
  Mandos  (the  last  heading  of  Synopsis I  is 'Tinuviel  goes to  Mandos and
  recalls  Beren');  in  which  case  my  father  must  have  intended  to  have
  Huan  return  from  the  dead  with  Beren  and  Luthien.   In  the   Tale  of
  Tinuviel  Huan  was  not  slain  (II.  39),  and  there  was no  prophecy con-
  cerning his fate to fall before the mightiest wolf that  should ever  walk the
  world;  but  he  became  the  companion  of  Mablung  (II.  41),  and  in  the
  Tale  of  the Nauglafring  he returned  to Beren  and Luthien  in the  land of
  i-Guilwarthon  after  the  death  of  Thingol  and  the  sack of  the Thousand
  Caves.                                                                        
                                       *                                        
