                                         APPENDIX.                                         
                                                                                          
                      C. S. Lewis's Commentary on the Lay of Leithian                      
                                                                                          
               I give here the greater part of this commentary, for which see pp. 150-1.*
               Lewis's line-references are of course changed throughout to those in this
               book. The letters H, J, K, L, P, R refer to the imaginary manuscripts of
               the ancient poem.
                 For the text criticised in the first entry of the commentary see
               pp. 157-8, i.e. text B(1).
                                                                                          
         Meats were  sweet. This  is the  reading of  PRK. Let                           
         any one believe if he can that our  author gave  such a                           
         cacophany.  J  His  drink  was  sweet his  dishes dear.                           
         L  His  drink  was  sweet  his  dish  was  dear. (Many                           
         scholars have rejected lines  x -  8 altogether  as un-                           
         worthy of the poet. 'They  were added  by a  later hand                           
         to supply  a gap  in the  archtype,' says  Peabody; and                           
         adds  'The  more  melodious  movement  and  surer  nar-                           
         rative stride of the passage beginning with line g [But                           
         fairer  than  are  born  to  Men]  should  convince the                           
         dullest that here, and here only, the authentic work of                           
         the  poet  begins.' I  am not  convinced that  H, which                           
         had better be quoted in  full, does  not give  the true                           
         opening of the Geste.                                                             
                                                                                          
                  That was long since in ages old                                          
                  When first the stars in heaven rolled,                                    
                  There dwelt beyond Broseliand,                                           
                  While loneliness yet held the land,                                      
                  A great king comely under crown,                                         
                  The gold was woven in his gown,                                        
                  The gold was clasped about his feet,                                    
                  The gold about his waist did meet.                                       
                  And in his many-pillared house                                           
                  Many a gold bee and ivory mouse                                          
                  And amber chessmen on their field                                        
                  Of copper, many a drinking horn                                          
                  Dear purchased from shy unicorn                                           
                  Lay piled, with gold in gleaming grot.                                   
                  All these he had etc.)                                                   
                                                                                          
 (* An  account of  it, with  some citation,  has been  given by  Humphrey Carpenter  in The
 Inklings, pp. 29-31, where the view expressed in his Biography, p. 145, that 'Tolkien did
 not accept any of Lewis's suggestions', is corrected.)                                    

  [It seems virtually certain that it was Lewis's criticism that led my father
  to rewrite the opening (the B (2) text, p. 154). If  the amber  chessmen and
  ivory mice found no place in the new version, it is notable that  in Lewis's
  lines  occur  the  words  'And in  his many-pillared  house'. These  are not
  derived from the B (1) text which Lewis read, but in B (2) appears  the line
  (14)  in  many-pillared  halls  of  stone.  It   seems  then   that  Durin's
  many-pillared halls in Gimli's  song in  Moria were  originally so  called by
  C. S. Lewis, thinking of the halls of Thingol in Doriath.]                  
                                                                             
      40. The description of Luthien has been too often and too            
          justly  praised  to  encourage  the mere  commentator in            
          intruding.                                                          
                                                                             
      68.      tall.   Thus   PRKJH.   L  east.   Schick's  complimentary
               title  of  'internal  rime'  for  these  cacophanies  does  not
               much   mend   matters.   'The   poet   of   the    Geste   knew
               nothing  of  internal  rime,  and  its  appearance  (so called)
               is   an   infallible   mark   of   corruption'  (Pumpernickel).
               But cf. 209, 413.                                             
                                                                             
       71-2.  The reader who wishes to acquire a touchstone for the           
       true  style  of  the Geste  had better  learn by  heart this           
       faultless and characteristic distych.                                  
                                                                             
          77.       HL Of mortal men at feast has heard        
                                                                             
  [The line in B(1) was of mortal feaster ever heard. With hath for has       
  Lewis's line was adopted.]                                                  
                                                                             
    99 - 150. This is considered by all critics one of the noblest            
               passages in the Geste.                                         
                                                                             
     112. Notice the double sense of within (macrocosmic and             
         microcosmic).  That  the  original  poet  may  have been             
         unconscious  of  this  need not  detract from  our plea-             
         sure.                                                                
                                                                             
  [Lewis  was clearly  right to  suspect that  the original  poet had  no such
  double sense in mind.]                                                      

                     
                                                                                  
       117.                     H The legions of his marching hate        
                                                                                  
    [Lewis  was  criticising the  original line  in B  his evil  legions' marshalled
    hate.   With   retention   of   marshalled   for   marching  Lewis's   line  was
    adopted.]                                                                      
                                                                                  
    [In the following comment the reading criticised was:                          
                                                                                  
                   swift ruin red of fire and sword                                   
                   leapt forth on all denied his word,                             
                   and all the lands beyond the hills                          125
                   were filled arith sorrow and with ills.]                          
                                                                                  
       124. The relative understood. I suspect both the construc-                  
       tion  and  the  word  denied,  neither  of  which  has the                  
       true ring. H reads:                                                         
                                                                                  
                   And ruin of red fire and sword                                  
                   To all that would not hail him lord                             
                   Came fast, and far beyond the hills                             
                   Spread Northern wail and iron ills.                            
                   And therefore in wet woods and cold etc.                      
                                                                                  
       130. 'A weak line' (Peabody) .                                               
                                                                                  
    [The original reading in B which Lewis criticised was who had this king       
    once held in scorn, changed to who once a prince of Men was born]             
                                                                                  
         137. Some emend. The rhythm, however, is good, and                    
             probably would occur more often if the syllabic                      
             prudery of scribes had not elsewhere 'emended' it.                   
                                                                                  
       172. LH When I lost all                                                      
       [No alteration made to the text.]                                           
                                                                                  
       173-4.           L Thus, out of met night  while he gazed,                   
                        he thought, with heavy heart amazed                        
                                                                                  
    [No alteration made to the text.]                                             
                                                                                  
    [In the following comment the reading criticised was:                          
                                                                                  
                        But ere he dared to call her name                          
                        or ask how she escaping came]                             

 175-6. she escaping. A Latinised phrase, at once betraying                  
 very  late  corruption.  The  ugly assonace  ere... dared                  
 confirms  my  suspicion of  the distych.  No satisfactory                  
 emendation has been proposed.                                              
                                                                           
 [she escaping came was changed to she escaped and came]                    
                                                                           
                  196. H Whining, his spirit ached for ease. Peabody
                  observes of the whole passage: 'The combination           
                  of extreme simplicity, with convincing truth of           
                  psychology, and the pathos which,  without com-           
                  ment,  makes us  aware that  Gorlim is  at once           
                  pardonable and  unpardonable, render  this part           
                  of the story extremely affecting.'                        
                                                                           
 [No alteration made to line 196]                                           
                                                                           
    208. haply. LH chance.                                                   
 [No alteration made to the text.]                                          
                                                                           
 209 - 10. One of the few passages in which Schick's theory of               
             deliberate internal rime finds some support.                   
 [See the comment on line 68.]                                              
                                                                           
     2I5. that. H the.                                                       
 [No alteration made to the text.]                                          
                                                                           
 [The  lines  313  -  16  referred  to  in  the  following comment  had been
 bracketed for exclusion, and that at 3 I 7 changed to Then, before the text
 went to Lewis.]                                                            
                                                                           
              313.  H reads Thus Morgoth loved that his own foe             
                         Should in his service deal the blow.               
                         Then Beren...                                      
                                                                           
             'Our  scribe is  right in  his erasure  of the  second distych,
             but  wrong  in  his  erasure  of  the  first'   (Peabody).  The
             first  erased  couplet  certainly  deserves  to  remain  in the
             text;  indeed  its  loss  seriously  impairs  the   reality  of
             Morgoth.   I   should   print  as   in  H,   enclosing  Thus...
             blow in brackets or dashes.                                   

                                                                            
                                                                             
   [My father ticked the first  two lines  (313-14), which  may show  that he
   accepted this suggestion. I have let all four stand in the text.]          
                                                                             
        400. Of Canto z as a whole Peabody writes: 'If this is not            
         good  romantic  narrative, I  confess myself  ignorant of            
         the meaning of the words.'                                           
                                                                             
        401. et seq. A more philosophical account of the period is            
         given  in  the  so  called  Poema   Historiale,  probably            
         contemporary  with  the  earliest   MSS  of   the  Geste.            
         The relevant passage runs as follows:                                
                                                                             
                     There was a time before the ancient sun                
                     And swinging wheels of heaven had learned                 
                     to run                                                   
                   More certainly than dreams; for dreams                     
                     themselves                                               
                   Had bodies then and filled the world with elves.            
                   The starveling lusts whose walk is now                   
                     confined                                                 
                   To darkness and the cellarage of the mind,                 
                   And shudderings and despairs and shapes of sin             
                   Then walked at large, and were not cooped                 
                     within.                                                  
                   Thought cast a shadow: brutes could speak:                 
                     and men                                                  
                   Get children on a star. For spirit then                    
                   Kneaded a fluid world and dreamed it new                    
                   Each moment. Nothing yet was false or true.               
                                                                             
 [Humphrey Carpenter, who cites these verses in The Inklings, says
 (p. 30): Sometimes Lewis actually suggested entirely new passages to
 replace lines he thought poor, and here too he ascribed his own versions
 to supposedly historical sources. For example, he suggested that the lines
 about the "elder days" [401 ff.] could be replaced by the following stanza
 of his own, which he described as "the so called Poema Historiale
 [&c.]".' But he cannot have intended these lines, which not only, as
  Humphrey Carpenter says, show 'how greatly Lewis's poetic imagi-
  nation differed from Tolkien's', but are in a different metre, as a
  replacement; see Lewis's comment on lines 438 - 42.]
                                                                             
               413.  Another  instance  where the  'internal rime'  theory is
                justified.                                                    

 438-42.  Almost certainly spurious. This abstract philosophi-               
 cal  statement  -  which  would  not   surprise  us   in  the               
 scholastic   verse  of   the  period,   such  as   the  Poema               
 Historiale - is  quite foreign  to the  manner of  the Geste.               
 L reads:                                                                    
                                                                            
                                 ...singing in the wood                      
                    And long he stood and long he stood                      
                    Till, many a day, with hound and hail                   
                    His people seek him ere they sail,                       
                    Then, finding not, take ship with tears.                 
                    But after a long tale of years                           
                    (Though but an hour to him it seemed)                    
                    He found her where she lay and dreamed.                  
                                                                            
 [My father marked lines 438 ff. in the  typescript, but  made no  change to
 the text.]                                                                  
                                                                            
      516. Flowering candles. The reader should notice how the               
       normally plain style of the Geste has yet the  power of               
       rising into such expressions as this without losing its               
       unity.                                                                
                                                                            
 [In the following comment the reading criticised was:                       
                                                                            
                    the silent elms stood dark and tall,                     
                    and mund their boles did shadows fall               518
                    where glimmered faint...]                                
                                                                            
       518. did PRK, let JL. Though neither is good,  PRK seems          
            the  better  reading.  Its  slight  clumsiness  may  be          
            passed over by a reader intent on the story: the 'neat'          
            evasion let, with its purely  formal attribution  of an          
            active  role  to  the  trees, is  much worse,  as cheap          
            scenery is worse than a plain backcloth. H reads:                
                                                                            
                      The  silent  elms  stood  tall  and grey               
                      And at the roots long shadows lay                      
                                                                            
       519-42. 'This  passage', Peabody  observes, 'amply  atones for
            the   poet's   lapse   (dormitat    Homerus)   in    518.   Ipsa
            mollities.'                                                      
                                                                            
 [I do not understand why Lewis picked particularly on did at line 518: the

   use of did as a metrical aid was very common in the B-text as Lewis saw it
  - it occurred twice, for instance, in the passage here praised: did flutter
  523, did waver 533, both subsequently changed.]                              
                                                                              
        555 - 6.   'O si sic omnia! Does not our poet show glimpses of         
                   the true empyrean of poesy, however, in his work-           
                                                                              
                   manlike   humility,   he   has    chosen   more    often   to
                   inhabit  the  milder  and   aerial  (not   aetherial)  middle
                   heaven?'    (Pumpernickel).   Some    have   seen    in   the
                   conception  of  death-into-life  a  late  accretion.  But cf.
                   the  very  early  lyric  preserved  in  the  MS  N3057,  now
                   in   the   public  library   at  Narrowthrode   (the  ancient
                   Nargothrond),  which  is  probably  as  early  as  the Geste,
                   though  like  all  the  scholastic  verse  it strikes  a more
                   modern note:                                                
                                                                              
                     Because of endless pride                                  
                     Reborn with endless error,                                 
                     Each hour I look aside                                    
                      Upon my secret mirror,                                   
                     And practice postures there                               
                      To make my image fair.                                   
                                                                              
                      You give me grapes, and I,                               
                      Though staring, turn to see                              
                     How  dark  the cool  globes lie                         
                      In the white hand of me,                                 
                     And stand, yet gazing thither,                            
                      Till the live clusters wither.                           
                                                                              
                      So should I quickly die                                  
                      Narcissus-like for want,                                
                      Save that betimes my eye                                 
                      Sees there such shapes as haunt                         
                      Beyond nightmare and make                                
                      Pride  humble  for  pride's  sake.                       
                                                                              
                        Then, and then only, turning                           
                     The stiff neck mund, I grow                                
                        A molten man all burning                               
                     And look behind, and know                                
                     Who made the flaw, what light makes dark,                  
                        what fair                                             

              Makes foul my shadowy form reflected there,                       
           That self-love, big with love, dying, its child                     
              may bear.                                                         
                                                                               
 [It  is  a  matter  for  speculation,  what the  author of  Nargothrond thought
 of  the  public  library  at  Narrowthrode.  -  This  poem,  with  some  alter-
 ations, was included in The Pilgrim's Regress (1933).]                         
                                                                               
     563-92. Sic in all MSS. The passage is, of course, genuine,          
          and  truly  worthy  of  the  Geste.   But  surely   it  must          
          originally  have  stood  at  391  Of  393?   The  artificial          
          insertion  of  Beren's  journey  in  its  present   place  -          
          where  it  appears  as retrospect  not as  direct narrative,          
          though   defensible,  belongs   to  a   kind  of   art  more          
          sophisticated  than that  of the  Geste: it  is just  such a          
          transposition  as  a  late  Broseliandic  literary  redactor          
          would  make  under  the  influence  of  the  classical epic.          
                                                                               
 [A quarter of a century  later, or  more, my  father rewrote  this part  of the
 poem; and he took Lewis's advice. See p. 352.]                                 
                                                                               
 [The  original  reading  of B  criticised in  the next  comment (lines 629 ff.)
 was:                                                                           
                                                                               
          Then stared he wild in dumbness bound                                 
          at silent trees, deserted ground;                                      
          the dizzy moon was twisted grey                                      
          in tears, for she had fled away.)                                    
                                                                               
         629 - 30 Thus in PRKJ. The Latinised adverbial use of the              
         adjective in mild and  the omitted  articles in  the next              
         line are suspicious.                                                   
                                                                               
            L But wildly Beren gazed around                                    
                  On silent trees (and)* empty ground.                         
                  The dizzy moon etc.                                           
                                                                               
        (* Peabody supplies and. But the monosyllabic foot is                   
           quite possible. Cf. 687.)                                            
                                                                               
            H But wildly Beren gazed around.                                    
                  Emptied the tall trees stood. The ground                       
                  Lay empty. A lonely moon looked grey                           
                  Upon the untrodden forest may.                                

                                                                                       
                                                                                         
           I prefer H because it gets rid of the conceit (it is little                    
           more)   about   the  moon.   (This  sort   of  half-hearted                    
           personification  is,  of course,  to be  distinguished from                    
           genuine mythology.)                                                            
                                                                                         
  [Against  this  my  father  scribbled  on  Lewis's text:  'Not so!!  The moon           
  ' was dizzy and twisted because  of the  tears in  his eyes.'  Nonetheless he           
  struck  the two  lines out  heavily in  the typescript,  and I  have excluded           
  them from the text.]                                                                    
                                                                                         
    635-6.  An excellent simile.                                                          
                                                                                         
      641. Peabody, though a great friend to metrical resol-                          
           utions in general,  finds this  particular resolution                          
           (Bewildered  enchanted)  'singularly   harsh'.  Per-                          
           haps the original text read wildered.                                         
                                                                                         
          : [The reading in B was bewildered, enchanted and forlorn. My father            
          then changed bewildered to wildered and placed it after enchanted.]            
                                                                                         
    651-2.  JHL transpose.                                                                
                                                                                         
  [This was done. Cf. lines 1222 - 3, where these lines are repeated but left            
   in the original sequence.]                                                             
                                                                                         
   [After line 652 B had:                                                                 
                                                                                         
        Thus thought his heart. No words would come                                      
        from his fast lips, for smitten dumb                                               
        a spell lay on him, as a dream                                                    
        in longing chained beside the stream.                                             
                                                                                         
  After  seeing  Lewis's  comment  my  father  marked  this  passage  'revise',           
  and  also  with a  deletion mark,  on which  basis I  have excluded  the four           
  lines from the text.]                                                                   
                                                                                         
   Only  in  PR.  Almost  undoubtedly  spurious.  'The  latest  redac-                    
   tors',  says  Pumpernickel,  'were  always  needlessly  amplifying,                    
   as if the imagination of their readers could do nothing for itself,                    
   and  thus  blunting  the true  force and  energy of  the Geste....'                    
   Read:                                                                                  
                                                                                         
                    A heartache and a loneliness                                          
                    - Enchanted waters pitiless.'                                         
                       A summer maned etc.                                                

 [heartache was the original reading  of B  at 651 x, changed  later to          
 hunger, but retained at 1223.]                                                  
                                                                                
              653-72. Of this  admirable passage  Peabody remarks:  'It is  as if
              the wood itself were speaking.'                                    
                                                                                
               677-9. LH From dim cave the damp moon eyed            
                      White mists that float from earth to hide                    
                      The sluggard morrow's sun and drip                        
                                                                                
 [No alteration made to the text.]                                               
                                                                                
              683. Beat, which is utterly inappropriate to the sound             
               described,  must  be   a  corruption.   No  plausible             
               emendation has been suggested.                                    
                                                                                
 [My  father  scribbled  in  a  hesitant  substitute  for  beat and  a different
 form  for  line  684  (of  his own  feet on  leafy....) but  I cannot  read the
 rhyming words.)                                                                 
                                                                                
               685-708. In praise of this  passage I  need not  add to  the in-
               numerable eulogies of my predecessors.                            
                                                                                
      710. Bentley read sam far off, to avoid the ugliness that                  
       always  results  from  w-final  followed  by  an initial                  
       vowel in the next word.                                                   
                                                                                
 [The reading  criticised was  saw afar,  and the  line was  changed as          
 suggested.)                                                                     
                                                                                
              715. Stole he PRK. He stole JHL.  PRK looks  like the              
               metrical 'improvement' of a scribe: dearly bought by              
               a meaningless inversion.                                          
                                                                                
 [The reading criticised was Then stole he nigh,  changed to  Then nigh          
 he stole.)                                                                      
                                                                                
               727 -  45 This  passage, as  it stands,  is seriously  corrupt, though
               the beauty of the original can still be discerned.                
                                                                                
 [See the following notes.]                                                      

                                                                          
                                                                             
  [The original reading of B in lines 729 - 30 was:                           
                                                                             
                       the hillock green he leapt upon -                      
                       the elfin loveliness was gone;]                         
                                                                             
                729. Intolerable bathos and prose in a passage of such        
                 tension.                                                     
                                                                             
  [The original reading of B in line 739 was:                                 
                                                                             
                       its echoes wove a halting spell:]                     
                                                                             
                739.  Why  halting?  'Let  the  amanuensis  take  back his
                 rubbish' (Bentley) .                                         
                                                                             
  [Against this my father wrote 'A spell to halt anyone', but in the margin
  of  B  he  wrote  staying/binding,  and  I  have  adopted binding  in the
  text.]                                                                      
                                                                             
  [The original reading of B in lines 741 - 5 was:                            
                                                                             
                       His voice such love and longing fill            741      
                       one moment stood she, touched and still;               
                       one moment only, but he came                           
                       and all his heart was burned with flame.      744]     
                                                                             
    741-2. The historic present is always to be suspected. The             
      second  verse  is  hopelessly  corrupt.  Touched   in  this             
      sense  is  impossible  in  the language  of the  Geste: and             
      if the word were possible, the conception  is fitter  for a             
      nineteenth    century    drawing-room    in    Narrowthrode             
      than for the loves of heroes. HL read:                                  
                                                                             
                         And clear his voice came as a bell                   
                       Whose echoes move a wavering spell                     
                       Tinuviel. Tinuviel.                                    
                       Such love and longing filled his voice                 
                       That, one moment, without choice,                     
                       One moment without fear or shame,                     
                       Tinuviel stood; and like a flame                       
                       He leapt towards her as she stayed                     
                       And caught and kissed that elfin maid.                  
                                                                             
  [My  father  marked  the  passage  'revise', and  very roughly  corrected it
  (adopting the  concluding verses  of Lewis's  version) to  the form  which I
  have given in the text, despite the defective couplet.]                     

  [The original reading of B was:                                               
                                                                               
                        aswoon in mingled grief and bliss,                      
                        enchantment of an elvish kiss.)                         
                                                                               
       760-1.  L Aswoon with grief, aswoon arith bliss,                        
                        Enchanted of an elvish kiss.                            
                                                                               
  [enchanted for enchantment was adopted.)                                      
                                                                               
  [The original reading - the text B(1) seen by Lewis, see p. 194- of lines     
                                                                               
  762 - 73 was:                                                                 
                                                                               
                        and saw within his blinded eyes                       
                        a light that danced like silver flies                     
                        a starlit face of tenderness                            
                        crowned by the stars of Elfinesse.                      
                        A mist a:as in his face like hair,                   5
                        and laughing whispers moved the air -                    
                        'O! dance with me now, Beren. Dance! '-                 
                        a silver laugh, a mocking glance:                       
                        'Come dance the wild and headlong maze                 
                        those dance, we're told, beyond the ways             10
                        who dwell that lead to lands of Men!                   
                        Come teach the feet of Luthien! '                      
                        The shadows wrapped her. Like a stone                    
                        the daylight found him cold and lone.                   
                                                                               
  On line 8 of this passage Lewis commented:]                                   
                                                                               
                  L a silver laughter, an arch glance                           
                                                                               
                  'Whether mocking or arch is the more intolerably              
                  miss-ish I care not to decide' (Peabody).                     
                                                                               
  [The line was abandoned in the B(2) version. On lines 9 - 12 Lewis            
  commented:]                                                                   
                                                                               
                  JHL  omit.  Is  not  the  whole  passage  [from  the  begin-
                  ning  of  the  Canto  to the  end of  the passage  from B(1)
                  given above] unworthy of the poet?                            
                                                                               
  [It is clear that this severe criticism led to the rewriting of the opening of
  the Canto.]                                                                   
                                                                               
                 775. The chiasmus  'is suspiciously  classical. H  gives Dark
                  is the sun, cold is the air.                                 

  [Against this my father scribbled:  But classics  did not  invent chiasmus!
  - it is perfectly natural.' (Chiasmus:  a grammatical  figure by  which the
  order of words is one of two parallel clauses is  inverted in  the other.)]
                                                                            
  [The passage criticised by Lewis in the following comment was:             
                                                                            
                     Hateful  art thou,  0 Land  of Trees!                   
                     My  flute  shall finger no  more seize;                   
                     may music perish etc.]                                  
                                                                            
             849. Clearly corrupt. HJL Oh hateful land of trees be           
               mute! My fingers, now forget the flute!                          
                                                                            
  [Against  this  my  father wrote:  'Frightful 18th  century!!!' But  he re-
  ordered  the  second  line to:  my fingers  the flute  shall no  more seize,
  and subsequently rewrote the passage to the form given  in the  text, lines
  849-52.]                                                                   
                                                                            
     849-83.  'These lines are very noble' (Pumpernickel).                   
                                                                            
             909.   cometh. HJL comes. HJL is certainly the more              
               emphatic rhythm.                                              
                                                                            
  [No alteration made to the text.]                                          
                                                                            
  [The original reading of B at line 911 was:                               
                                                                            
                                           ...those shores,                  
               those white rocks where the last tide mars]                  
                                                                            
             911.     'Where eight  dull words  oft creep  in one  low line.'
                Lines  of  monosyllables  are  often  to  be  found   in  the
                Geste,   but   rarely   so   clustered  with   consonants  as
                this.   No  satisfactory   emendation  has   been  suggested.
                I  suspect  this  is  a  garbled  version  of  1142  - 3:
                our  scribes  do  not  always   accept  or   understand  epic
                repetition.                                                  
                                                                            
  [The emendation  made to  B and  given in  the text  is derived  from lines
  1142  -  3  as  Lewis  suggested.  His reference  is to  Pope, An  Essay on
  Criticism,  line  347:  And ten  low words  oft creep  in one  dull line.]
                                                                            
              978-9. In Gestestudien Vol. XIII pp. 9 - 930 the reader will
                          find a summary of the critical war that has raged

     round  the  possibility  of the  assonance (or  rime) of                 
     within-dim.  Perhaps  a  great  deal  of ink  would have                 
     been saved if the scholars of the last century  had been                 
     familiar  with  the  L  reading  Where  out  of yawning                 
     arches came A white light like unmoving flame.                           
     'My  own  conclusion  is  that if  the assonance  in the                 
     textus   receptus  is   correct,  the   same  phenomenon                 
     must  originally  have  occurred  often,  and  have been                 
     suppressed  elsewhere by  the scribes.  Editorial effort                 
     might profitably be devoted to restoring it' (Schuffer).                 
     But cf. 1140-1.                                                      
                                                                             
 [The original reading of B in lines 980 - x was:                             
                                                                             
           With gentle hand there she him led                                 
           down corridors etc.]                                               
                                                                             
        980. J  Downward  with gentle  hand she  him led,                 
           which explains the  corruption. The  verse origin-                 
           ally  ran  Downward with  gentle hand  she led.                 
           The scribe of J, wrongly believing an object to be                 
           needed,  inserted  him.  Vulg.  then  'emends' the                 
           metre   by   dropping   Downward   and   inserting                 
           there: thus giving a clumsy line.                                  
                                                                             
 [In  this  note  Vulg.  =  Vulgate,  the common  or usual  form of  a literary
 work. My father wrote in Lewis's  line on  the B-text  with his  initials, and
 made the consequent change of down to through in line 981.]                  
                                                                             
   [The original reading of B was: as into arched halls was led]             
 991.  HJL she led                                                            
                                                                             
 996. L in old stone carven stood                                              
 [No alteration made to the text.]                                            
                                                                             
 [The original reading in B was: while waters endless dripped and             
 ran]                                                                         
 1007.  H While water forever dript and ran                                 
   [The original reading in B was: in lightless labyrinths endlessly]         

    1075.  Labyrinths. HJL Labyrinth.                                     
                                                                       
 [Lewis corrected his spelling to Laborynth(s), against which my father
 queried: 'Why this spelling?']                                         
                                                                       
    980-1131.   The whole of this passage has always been deservedly
                regarded as one of the gems of the Geste.               
                                                                       
  1132-61.   I suspect that  this passage  has been  greatly expanded
  by   the   late    redactors   who    found   their    audience   some-
  times  very  ignorant  of  the  myths.  It  is,   as  it   stands,  far
  from   satisfactory.   On   the   one   hand   it   is   too   long  an
  interruption   of   the   action:    on   the    other   it    is   too
  succinct   for   a   reader   who   knows   nothing   of    the   myth-
  ology.  It  is  also   obscure:  thus   in  1145 few   readers  can
  grasp    that    their    means    'the    Silmarils'.    The   shorter
  version   of   H   and   L,    though   not    good,   may    in   some
  respects be nearer the original:                                      
                                                                       
                   Then Thingol's warriors loud and long                
                Laughed: for wide renown in song                        
                Had Feanor's gems o'er land and sea,                    
                The Silmarils, the shiners three,                       
                Three only, and in every one                            
                The light that was before the sun                       
                And moon, shone yet. But now no more                   
                Those leavings of the lights of yore                    
                Were seen on earth's back: in the drear                 
                Abysm of Morgoth blazing clear                          
                His iron crown they must adorn                           
                And glitter on orcs and slaves forlorn etc.             
                                                                       
 [My father put an exclamation mark against the shiners three; and he
 wrote an X against lines 1144 - 5 (see note to these lines).]          
                                                                       
                                    *                                   
                                                                       
  Here  C.  S.  Lewis's  commentary  on The  Gest  of Beren  and Luithien
 ends, and no more is recorded of the opinions of  Peabody, Pumpernickel,
 Schuffer and  Schick in  the volumes  of Gestestudien  - nor  indeed, on
 this subject, of those of their generous-minded inventor.              
