                                      IV.                                    
                             THE LAY OF LEITHIAN                             
                                 RECOMMENCED.                                
                                                                            
 When  my  father  began the  Lay of  Leithian again  from the  beginning, he
 did not at first intend  much more,  perhaps, than  a revision,  an improve-
 ment of individual lines and short passages,  but all  on the  original plan
 and structure. This, at least, is what he did with Canto  I; and  he carried
 out  the  revisions  on  the  old  B typescript.  But with  Canto II  he was
 quickly carried into a far  more radical  reconstruction, and  was virtually
 writing a new poem on the same subject  and in  the same  metre as  the old.
 This, it is true, was partly because the  story of  Gorlim had  changed, but
 it is also clear that a new impulse had entered, seeking  a new  rather than
 merely altered expression. The old typescript was still used  at least  as a
 physical basis for the new writing, but for a long stretch the  typed verses
 were  simply  struck  through  and  the  new written  on inserted  pages and
 slips.                                                                      
  The  old  Canto  II  of  just  over  300  lines  was  expanded to  500, and
 divided into new Cantos 2 and 3  (the old  and the  new can  be conveniently
 distinguished by Roman and Arabic numerals).                                
  The rewriting on the  old typescript  continues for  a short  distance into
 Canto  III  (new  Canto  4)  and  then  stops.  On  the  basis  of  this now
 extremely chaotic text  my father  wrote out  a fine,  decorated manuscript,
 'C',  inevitably introducing  some further  changes; and  this stops  only a
 few  lines  short  of the  point where  the rewriting  on the  B-text stops.
 Subsequently,  an  amanuensis  typescript  ('D')  was  made, in  two copies,
 apparently  with  my  father's  supervision,  but  for  the  moment  nothing
 need be said of this beyond noticing that he made  certain changes  to these
 texts at a later time.                                                      
                                                                            
  The  rewriting  on  the B-text  was no  doubt a  secondary stage,  of which
 the  preliminary  workings  no  longer  exist; for  in the  case of  the new
 Canto  4 such  preliminary drafts  are extant.  On one  of these  pages, and
 quite obviously done at the same time  as the  verse-drafts, my  father drew
 a floor-plan of part of the house 99  Holywell Street,  Oxford, to  which he
 removed  in  1950.  He  doubtless  drew  the  plan  shortly   before  moving
 house, while pondering its best  arrangement. It  is clear  then that  a new
 start on the Lay of Leithian was one of the first things  that he  turned to
 when The Lord of the Rings was complete.                                    
  I give below the text of the manuscript C in its final form (that is, after
 certain changes had been made to it)  so far  as it  goes (line 624), incor-

  porating  one  or  two  very  minor alterations  made later  to the  D type-
  script(s), followed by a further short section (lines 625 - 60) found  only in
  draft before  being  added to  D. Brief  Notes and  Commentary are  given on
  pp, 348 ff.                                                              
                                                                            
                             THE LAY OF LEITHIAN.                            
                                                                            
                          I. OF THINGOL IN DORIATH.                          
                                                                            
               A king there was in days of old:                              
               ere Men yet walked upon the mould                             
               his power was reared in caverns' shade,                       
               his hand was over glen and glade.                             
               Of leaves his crown, his mantle green,                        
               his silver lances long and keen;                              
               the starlight in his shield was caught,                       
               ere moon was made or sun was wrought.                         
               In after-days, when to the shore                              
               of Middle-earth from Valinor                               10
               the Elven-hosts in might returned,                            
               and banners flew and beacons burned,                          
               when kings of Eldamar went by                                 
               in strength of war, beneath the sky                           
               then still his silver trumpets blew                        15
               when sun was young and moon was new.                          
               Afar then in Beleriand,                                       
               in Doriath's beleaguered land,                                
               King Thingol sat on guarded throne                            
               in many-pillared halls of stone:                           20
               there beryl, pearl, and opal pale,                            
               and metal wrought like fishes' mail,                          
               buckler and corslet, axe-and sword,                           
               and gleaming spears were laid in hoard:                       
               all these he had and counted small,                        25
               for dearer than all wealth in hall,                           
               and fairer than are born to-Men,                              
               a daughter had he, Luthien.                                   
                                                                            
                           OF LUTHIEN THE BELOVED.                           
                                                                            
               Such lissom limbs no more shall run                           
               on the green earth beneath the sun;                        30

 so fair a maid no more shall be                
 from dawn to dusk, from sun to sea.            
 Her robe was blue as summer skies,             
 but grey as evening were her eyes;             
 her mantle sewn with lilies fair,           35
 but dark as shadow was her hair.               
 Her feet were swift as bird on wing,           
 her laughter merry as the spring;              
 the slender willow, the bowing reed,           
 the fragrance of a flowering mead,          40
 the light upon the leaves of trees,            
 the voice of water, more then these            
 her beauty was and blissfulness,               
 her glory and her loveliness.                  
                                               
   She dwelt in the enchanted land            45
 while elven-might yet held in hand             
 the woven woods of Doriath:                    
 none ever thither found the path               
 unbidden, none the forest-eaves                
 dared pass, or stir the listening leaves.   50
 To North there lay a land of dread,            
 Dungorthin where all ways were dead            
 in hills of shadow bleak and cold;             
 beyond was Deadly Nightshade's hold            
 in Taur-nu-Fuin's fastness grim,            55
 where sun was sick and moon was dim.           
 To South the wide earth unexplored;            
 to West the ancient Ocean roared,              
 unsailed and shoreless, wide and wild;         
 to East in peaks of blue were piled,        60
 in silence folded, mist-enfurled,              
 the mountains of the outer world.              
                                               
   Thus Thingol in his dolven hall              
 amid the Thousand Caverns tall                 
 of Menegroth as king abode:                 65
 to him there led no mortal road.               
 Beside him sat his deathless queen,            
 fair Melian, and wove unseen                   
 nets of enchantment round his throne,          
 and spells were laid on tree and stone:     70
 sharp was his sword and high his helm,         

 the king of beech and oak and elm.               
 When grass was green and leaves were long,       
 when finch and mavis sang their song,            
 there under bough and under sun              75
 in shadow and in light would run                 
 fair Luthien the elven-maid,                     
 dancing in dell and grassy glade.                
                                                 
        OF DAIRON MINSTREL OF THINGOL.            
                                                 
 When sky was clear and stars were keen,          
 then Dairon with his fingers lean,            80
 as daylight melted into eve,                     
 a trembling music sweet would weave              
 on flutes of silver, thin and clear              
 for Luthien, the maiden dear.                    
                                                 
  There mirth there was and voices bright;    85
  there eve was peace and morn was light;         
  there jewel gleamed and silver wan              
  and red gold on white fingers shone,            
  and elanor and niphredil                        
  bloomed in the grass unfading still,        90
  while the endless years of Elven-land           
  rolled over far Beleriand,                      
  until a day of doom befell,                     
  as still the elven-harpers tell.                
                                                 
     2. OF MORGOTH & THE SNARING OF GORLIM.      
                                                 
  Far in the Northern hills of stone         95
  in caverns black there was a throne             
  by flame encircled; there the smoke             
  in coiling columns rose to choke                
  the breath of life, and there in deep           
  and gasping dungeons lost would creep     100
  to hopeless death all those who strayed         
  by doom beneath that ghastly shade.             
    A king there sat, most dark and fell          

 of all that under heaven dwell.                 
 Than earth or sea, than moon or star         105
 more ancient was he, mightier far               
 in mind abysmal than the thought                
 of Eldar or of Men, and wrought                 
 of strength primeval; ere the stone             
 was hewn to build the world, alone           110
 he walked in darkness, fierce and dire,         
 burned, as he wielded it, by fire.              
 He 'twas that laid in ruin black                
 the Blessed Realm and fled then back            
 to Middle-earth anew to build                115
 beneath the mountains mansions filled           
 with misbegotten slaves of hate:                
 death's shadow brooded at his gate.             
 His hosts he armed with spears of steel         
 and brands of flame, and at their heel       120
 the wolf walked and the serpent crept           
 with lidless eyes. Now forth they leapt,        
 his ruinous legions, kindling war               
 in field and frith and woodland hoar.           
 %here long the golden elanor                 125
 had gleamed amid the grass they bore            
 their banners black, where finch had sung       
 and harpers silver harps had wrung              
 now dark the ravens wheeled and cried           
 amid the reek, and far and wide              130
 the swords of Morgoth dripped with red          
 above the hewn and trampled dead.               
 Slowly his shadow like a cloud                  
 rolled from the North, and on the proud         
 that would not yield his vengeance fell;     135
 to death or thraldom under hell                 
 all things he doomed: the Northern land         
 lay cowed beneath his ghastly hand.             
                                                
   But still there lived in hiding cold          
 Beor's son, Barahir the bold,                140
 of  land  bereaved  and  lordship shorn         
 who  once  a  prince  of Men  was born,         
 and  now  an  outlaw  lurked   and  lay         
 in  the hard  heath and  woodland grey.         

                         
                                                              
 OF  THE  SAVING  OF KING  INGLOR FELAGUND  BY THE  XII BEORINGS
                                                              
          Twelve men beside him still there went,          145
          still faithful when all hope was spent.              
          Their names are yet in elven-song                    
          remembered, though the years are long                
          since doughty Dagnir and Ragnor,                     
          Radhruin, Dairuin and Gildor,                    150
          Gorlim Unhappy, and Urthel,                          
          and Arthad and Hathaldir fell;                       
          since the black shaft with venomed wound             
          took Belegund and Baragund,                          
          the mighty sons of Bregolas;                     155
          since he whose doom and deeds surpass                
          all tales of Men was laid on bier,                   
          fair Beren son of Barahir.                           
          For these it was, the chosen men                     
          of Beor's house, who in the fen                  160
          of reedy Serech stood at bay                         
          about King Inglor in the day                         
          of his defeat, and with their swords                 
          thus saved of all the Elven-lords                    
          the fairest; and his love they earned.           165
          And he escaping south, returned                      
          to Nargothrond his mighty realm,                     
          where still he wore his crowned helm;                
          but they to their northern homeland rode,            
          dauntless and few, and there abode               170
          unconquered still, defying fate,                     
          pursued by Morgoth's sleepless hate.                 
                                                              
                 OF TARN AELUIN THE BLESSED.                   
                                                              
          Such deeds of daring there they wrought              
          that soon the hunters that them sought               
          at rumour of their coming fled.                  175
          Though price was set upon each head                  
          to match the weregild of a king,                     
          no soldier could to Morgoth bring                    
          news even of their hidden lair;                      
          for where the highland brown and bare            180
          above the darkling pines arose                       
          of steep Dorthonion to the snows                     

 and barren mountain-winds, there lay           
 a tarn of water, blue by day,                  
 by night a mirror of dark glass             185
 for stars of Elbereth that pass                
 above the world into the West.                 
 Once hallowed, still that place was blest:     
 no shadow of Morgoth, and no evil thing        
 yet thither came; a whispering ring         190
 of slender birches silver-grey                 
 stooped on its margin, round it lay            
 a lonely moor, and the bare bones              
 of ancient Earth like standing stones          
 thrust through the heather and the whin;    195
 and there by houseless Aeluin                  
 the hunted lord and faithful men               
 under the grey stones made their den.          
                                               
              OF GORLIM UNHAPPY.                
                                               
 Gorlim Unhappy, Angrim's son,                  
 as the tale tells, of these was one         200
 most fierce and hopeless. He to wife,          
 while fair was the fortune of his life,        
 took the white maiden Eilinel:                 
 dear love they had ere evil fell.              
 To war he rode; from war returned           205
 to find his fields and homestead burned,       
 his house forsaken roofless stood,             
 empty amid the leafless wood;                  
 and Eilinel, white Eilinel,                    
 was taken whither none could tell,          210
 to death or thraldom far away.                 
 Black was the shadow of that day               
 for ever on his heart, and doubt               
 still gnawed him as he went about              
 in wilderness wandring, or at night         215
 oft sleepless, thinking that she might         
 ere evil came have timely fled                 
 into the woods: she was not dead,              
 she lived, she would return again              
 to seek him, and would deem him slain.      220
 Therefore at whiles he left the lair,          

 and secretly, alone, would peril dare,        
 and come to his old house at night,           
 broken and cold, without fire or light,       
 and naught but grief renewed would gain,   225
 watching and waiting there in vain.           
                                              
 In vain, or worse - for many spies            
 had Morgoth, many lurking eyes                
 well used to pierce the deepest dark;         
 and Gorlim's coming they would mark        230
 and would report. There came a day            
 when once more Gorlim crept that way,         
 down the deserted weedy lane                  
 at dusk of autumn sad with rain               
 and cold wind whining. Lo! a light         235
 at window fluttering in the night             
 amazed he saw; and drawing near,              
 between faint hope and sudden fear,           
 he looked within. 'Twas Eilinel!              
 Though changed she was, he knew her well.  240
 With grief and hunger she was worn,           
 her tresses tangled, raiment torn;             
 her gentle eyes with tears were dim,          
 as soft she wept: 'Gorlim, Gorlim!            
 Thou canst not have forsaken me.           245
 Then slain, alas! thou slain must be!         
 And I must linger cold, alone,                
 and loveless as a barren stone! '             
                                              
   One cry he gave - and then the light        
 blew out, and in the wind of night         250
 wolves howled; and on his shoulder fell       
 suddenly the griping hands of hell.           
 There Morgoth's servants fast him caught      
 and he was cruelly bound, and brought         
 to Sauron captain of the host,             255
 the lord of werewolf and of ghost,            
 most foul and fell of all who knelt           
 at Morgoth's throne. In might he dwelt        
 on Gaurhoth Isle; but now had ridden          
 with strength abroad, by Morgoth bidden    260
 to find the rebel Barahir.                    
 He sat in dark encampment near,               

 and thither his butchers dragged their prey.       
 There now in anguish Gorlim lay:                   
 with bond on neck, on hand and foot,            165
 to bitter torment he was put,                      
 to break his will and him constrain                
 to buy with treason end of pain.                   
 But naught to them would he reveal                 
 of Barahir, nor break the seal                  270
 of faith that on his tongue was laid;              
 until at last a pause was made,                    
 and one came softly to his stake,                  
 a darkling form that stooped, and spake            
 to him of Eilinel his wife.                     275
   'Wouldst thou,' he said, 'forsake thy life,      
 who with few words might win release               
 for her, and thee, and go in peace,                
                                                   
 and dwell together far from war,                   
 friends of the King? What wouldst thou more?' 280
 And Gorlim, now long worn with pain,               
 yearning to see his wife again                     
                                                   
 (whom well he weened was also caught               
 in Sauron's net), allowed the thought              
 to grow, and faltered in his troth.             285
 Then straight, half willing and half loath,        
 they brought him to the seat of stone              
 where Sauron sat. He stood alone                   
 before that dark and dreadful face,                
 and Sauron said: 'Come, mortal base!            290
 What do I hear? That thou wouldst dare             
 to barter with me? Well, speak fair!               
 What is thy price?' And Gorlim low                
 bowed down his head, and with great woe,           
 word on slow word, at last implored             295
 that merciless and faithless lord                  
 that he might free depart, and might               
 again find Eilinel the White,                      
 and dwell with her, and cease from war             
 against the King. He craved no more.            300
                                                   
 Then Sauron smiled, and said: 'Thou thrall!        
 The price thou askest is but small                 
 for treachery and shame so great!                  

 I grant it surely! Well, I wait:                        
 Come! Speak now swiftly and speak true!'  305           
 Then Gorlim wavered, and he drew                        
 half back; but Sauron's daunting eye                    
                                                        
 there held him, and he dared not lie:                   
 as he began, so must he wend                            
 from first false step to faithless end:             310
 he all must answer as he could,                         
 betray his lord and brotherhood,                        
 and cease, and fall upon his face.                      
                                                        
 Then Sauron laughed aloud. 'Thou base,                  
 thou cringing worm! Stand up,                       315
 and hear me! And now drink the cup                      
 that I have sweetly blent for thee!                     
 Thou fool: a phantom thou didst see                     
 that I, I Sauron, made to snare                         
 thy lovesick wits. Naught else was there.           320
 Cold 'tis with Sauron's wraiths to wed!                 
 Thy Eilinel! She is long since dead,                    
 dead, food of worms less low than thou.                 
 And yet thy boon I grant thee now:                      
 to Eilinel thou soon shalt go,                      325
 and lie in her bed, no more to know                     
 of war - or manhood. Have thy pay! '                    
                                                        
 And Gorlim then they dragged away,                      
 and cruelly slew him; and at last                       
 in the dank mould his body cast,                    330
 where Eilinel long since had laid                       
 in the burned woods by butchers slain.                  
 Thus Gorlim died an evil death,                         
 and cursed himself with dying breath,                   
 and Barahir at last was caught                      335
 in Morgoth's snare; for set.at naught                   
 by treason was the ancient grace                        
 that guarded long that lonely place,                    
 Tarn Aeluin: now all laid bare                          
 were secret paths and hidden lair.                  340
                                                        
                      *                                  

   3. OF BEREN SON OF BARAHIR & HIS ESCAPE.       
                                                  
 Dark from the North now blew the cloud;           
 the winds of autumn cold and loud                 
 hissed in the heather; sad and grey               
 Aeluin's mournful water lay.                      
 'Son Beren', then said Barahir,                345
 'Thou knowst the rumour that we hear              
 of strength from the Gaurhoth that is sent        
 against us; and our food nigh spent.              
 On thee the lot falls by our law                  
 to go forth now alone to draw                  350
 what help thou canst from the hidden few          
 that feed us still, and what is new               
 to learn. Good fortune go with thee!              
 In speed return, for grudgingly                   
 we spare thee from our brotherhood,            355
 so small: and Gorlim in the wood                  
 is long astray or dead. Farewell!'               
 As Beren went, still like a knell                 
 resounded in his heart that word,                 
 the last of his father that he heard.          360
                                                  
 Through moor and fen, by tree and briar           
 he wandered far: he saw the fire                  
 of Sauron's camp, he heard the howl               
 of hunting Orc and wolf a-prowl,                  
 and turning back, for long the way,            365
 benighted in the forest lay.                      
 In weariness he then must sleep,                  
 fain in a badger-hole to creep,                   
 and yet he heard (or dreamed it so)               
 nearby a marching legion go                    370
 with clink of mail and clash of shields           
 up towards the stony mountain-fields.             
 He slipped then into darkness down,               
 until, as man that waters drown                   
 strives upwards gasping, it seemed to him      375
 he rose through slime beside the brim             
 of sullen pool beneath dead trees.                
 Their livid boughs in a cold breeze               
 trembled, and all their black leaves stirred:     
 each leaf a black and croaking bird,           380

 whose neb a gout of blood let fall.             
 He shuddered, struggling thence to crawl        
 through winding weeds, when far away            
 he saw a shadow faint and grey                  
 gliding across the dreary lake.              385
 Slowly it came, and softly spake:               
 'Gorlim I was, but now a wraith                 
 of will defeated, broken faith,                 
 traitor betrayed. Go! Stay not here!            
 Awaken, son of Barahir,                      390
 and haste! For Morgoth's fingers close          
 upon thy father's throat; he knows              
 your trysts, your paths, your secret lair.'     
 Then he revealed the devil's snare              
 in which he fell, and failed; and last       395
 begging forgiveness, wept, and passed           
 out into darkness. Beren woke,                  
 leapt up as one by sudden stroke                
 with fire of anger filled. His bow              
 and sword he seized, and like the roe        400
 hotfoot o'er rock and heath he sped             
 before the dawn. Ere day was dead               
 to Aeluin at last he came,                      
 as the red sun westward sank in flame;          
 but Aeluin was red with blood,               405
 red were the stones and trampled mud.           
 Black in the birches sat a-row                  
 the raven and the carrion crow;                 
 wet were their nebs, and dark the meat          
 that dripped beneath their griping feet.     410
 One croaked: 'Ha, ha, he comes too late! '      
 'Ha, ha! ' they answered, 'ha! too late! '      
 There Beren laid his father's bones             
 in haste beneath a cairn of stones;             
 no graven rune nor word he wrote             415
 o'er Barahir, but thrice he smote               
 the topmost stone, and thrice aloud             
 he cried his name. 'Thy death', he vowed,       
 'I will avenge. Yea, though my fate             
 should lead at last to Angband's gate.'      420
 And then he turned, and did not weep:           
 too dark his heart, the wound too deep.         

 Out into night, as cold as stone,                   
 loveless, friendless, he strode alone.              
                                                    
 Of hunter's lore he had no need                425
 the trail to find. With little heed                 
 his ruthless foe, secure and proud,                 
 marched north away with blowing loud                
 of brazen horns their lord to greet,                
 trampling the earth with grinding feet.        430
 Behind them bold but wary went                      
 now Beren, swift as hound on scent,                 
 until beside a darkling well,                       
 where Rivil rises from the fell                     
 down into Serech's reeds to flow,              435
 he found the slayers, found his foe.                
 From hiding on the hillside near                    
 he marked them all: though less than fear,          
 too many for his sword and bow                      
 to slay alone. Then, crawling low              440
 as snake in heath, he nearer crept.                 
 There many weary with marching slept,               
 but captains, sprawling on the grass,               
 drank and from hand to hand let pass                
 their booty, grudging each small thing         445
 raped from dead bodies. One a ring                  
 held up, and laughed: 'Now, mates,' he cried        
 'here's mine! And I'll not be denied,               
 though few be like it in the land.                  
 For I 'twas wrenched it from the hand          450
 of that same Barahir I slew,                        
 the robber-knave. If tales be true,                 
 he had it of some elvish lord,                      
 for the rogue-service of his sword.                 
 No help it gave to him - he's dead.            455
 They're parlous, elvish rings, 'tis said;           
 still for the gold I'll keep it, yea                
 and so eke out my niggard pay.                      
 Old Sauron bade me bring it back,                   
 and yet, methinks, he has no lack              460
 of weightier treasures in his hoard:                
 the greater the greedier the lord!                  
 So mark ye, mates, ye all shall swear               

 the hand of Barahir was bare!'               
 And as he spoke an arrow sped              465
 from tree behind, and forward dead            
 choking he fell with barb in throat;          
 with leering face the earth he smote.         
 Forth, then as wolfhound grim there leapt     
 Beren among them. Two he swept             470
 aside with sword; caught up the ring;         
 slew one who grasped him; with a spring       
 back into shadow passed, and fled             
 before their yells of wrath and dread         
 of ambush in the valley rang.              475
 Then after him like wolves they sprang,       
 howling and cursing, gnashing teeth,          
 hewing and bursting through the heath,        
 shooting wild arrows, sheaf on sheaf,         
 at trembling shade or shaken leaf.         480
 In fateful hour was Beren born:               
 he laughed at dart and wailing horn;          
 fleetest of foot of living men,               
 tireless on fell and light on fen,            
 elf-wise in wood, he passed away,          485
 defended by his hauberk grey                  
 of dwarvish craft in Nogrod made,             
 where hammers rang in cavern's shade.         
                                              
 As fearless Beren was renowned:               
 when men most hardy upon ground            490
 were reckoned folk would speak his name,      
 foretelling that his after-fame               
 would even golden Hador pass                  
 or Barahir and Bregolas;                      
 but sorrow now his heart had wrought       495
 to fierce despair, no more he fought          
 in hope of life or joy or praise,             
 but seeking so to use his days                
 only that Morgoth deep should feel            
 the sting of his avenging steel,           500
 ere death he found and end of pain:           
 his only fear was thraldom's chain.           
 Danger he sought and death pursued,           
 and thus escaped the doom he wooed,           

 and deeds of breathless daring wrought         505
 alone, of which the rumour brought                  
 new hope to many a broken man.                      
 They whispered 'Beren', and began                   
 in secret swords to whet, and soft                  
 by shrouded hearths at evening oft             510
 songs they would sing of Beren's bow,               
 of Dagmor his sword: how he would go                
 silent to camps and slay the chief,                 
 or trapped in his hiding past belief                
 would slip away, and under night               515
 by mist or moon, or by the light                    
 of open day would come again.                       
 Of hunters hunted, slayers slain                    
 they sang, of Gorgol the Butcher hewn,              
 of ambush in Ladros, fire in Drun,             520
 of thirty in one battle dead,                       
 of wolves that yelped like curs and fled,           
 yea, Sauron himself with wound in hand.             
 Thus one alone filled all that land                 
 with fear and death for Morgoth's folk;        525
 his comrades were the beech and oak                 
 who failed him not, and wary things                 
 with fur and fell and feathered wings               
 that silent wander, or dwell alone                  
 in hill and wild and waste of stone            530
 watched o'er his ways, his faithful friends.        
                                                    
   Yet seldom well an outlaw ends;                   
 and Morgoth was a king more strong                  
 than all the world has since in song                
 recorded: dark athwart the land                 535
 reached out the shadow of his hand,                 
 at each recoil returned again;                      
                                                    
 two more were sent for one foe slain.               
 New hope was cowed, all rebels killed;              
 quenched were the fires, the songs were stilled,   540
 tree felled, heath burned, and through the waste
 marched the black host of Orcs in haste.            
                                                    
    Almost they closed their ring of steel           
 round Beren; hard upon his heel                     
 now trod their spies; within their hedge         545

 of all aid shorn, upon the edge                   
 of death at bay he stood aghast                   
 and knew that he must die at last,                
 or flee the land of Barahir,                      
 his land beloved. Beside the mere            550
 beneath a heap of nameless stones                 
 must crumble those once mighty bones,             
 forsaken by both son and kin,                     
 bewailed by reeds of Aeluin.                      
                                                  
 In winter's night the houseless North        555
 he left behind, and stealing forth                
 the leaguer of his watchful foe                   
 he passed - a shadow on the snow,                 
 a swirl of wind, and he was gone,                 
 the ruin of Dorthonion,                      560
 Tarn Aeluin and its water wan,                    
 never again to look upon.                         
 No more shall hidden bowstring sing,              
 no more his shaven arrows wing,                   
 no more his hunted head shall lie              565
 upon the heath beneath the sky.                   
 The Northern stars, whose silver fire             
 of old Men named the Burning Briar,               
 were set behind his back, and shone               
 o'er land forsaken: he was gone.             570
                                                  
 Southward he turned, and south away               
 his long and lonely journey lay,                  
 while ever loomed before his path                 
 the dreadful peaks of Gorgorath.                  
 Never had foot of man most bold              575
 yet trod those mountains steep and cold,          
 nor climbed upon their sudden brink,              
 whence, sickened, eyes must turn and,shrink       
 to see their southward cliffs fall sheer          
 in rocky pinnacle and pier                   580
 down into shadows that were laid                  
 before the sun and moon were made.                
 In valleys woven with deceit                      
 and washed with waters bitter-sweet               
 dark magic lurked in gulf and glen;           585
 but out away beyond the ken                       

   of mortal sight the eagle's eye                           
   from dizzy towers that pierced the sky                    
   might grey and gleaming see afar,                         
   as sheen on water under star,                         590
   Beleriand, Beleriand,                                     
   the borders of the Elven-land.                            
                                                            
 4.  OF THE COMING OF BEREN TO DORIATH; BUT FIRST IS TOLD OF
                                                            
                    THE MEETING OF MELIAN AND THINGOL.       
                                                            
   There long ago in Elder-days                              
   ere voice was heard or trod were ways,                    
   the haunt of silent shadows stood                     595
   in starlit dusk Nan Elmoth wood.                          
   In Elder-days that long are gone                          
   a light amid the shadows shone,                           
   a voice was in the silence heard:                         
   the sudden singing of a bird.                         600
   There Melian came, the Lady grey,                         
   and dark and long her tresses lay                         
   beneath her silver girdle-seat                            
   and down unto her silver feet.                            
   The nightingales with her she brought,                605
   to whom their song herself she taught,                    
   who sweet upon her gleaming hands                         
   had sung in the immortal lands.                           
   Thence wayward wandering on a time                        
   from Lorien she dared to climb                        610
   the everlasting mountain-wall                             
   of Valinor, at whose feet fall                            
   the surges of the Shadowy Sea.                            
   Out away she went then free,                              
   to gardens of the Gods no more                        615
   returning, but on mortal shore,                           
   a glimmer ere the dawn she strayed,                       
   singing her spells from glade to glade.                   
   A bird in dim Nan Elmoth wood                             
   trilled, and to listen Thingol stood                  620
   amazed; then far away he heard                            

         
                                                                            
     a voice more fair than fairest bird,                                    
     a voice as crystal clear of note                                        
     as thread of silver glass remote.                                       
                                                                            
 Here the manuscript C  ends. Of  the next  short section  there are  no less
 than five rough drafts, with endless  small variations  of wording  (and the
 first ten lines of it were written onto the B-text). The final form was then
 added, in type, to the D typescript:                                        
                                                                            
     Of folk and kin no more he thought;                               625
     of errand that the Eldar brought                                        
     from Cuivienen far away,                                                
     of lands beyond the Seas that lay                                       
     no more he recked, forgetting all,                                      
     drawn only by that distant call                                   630
     till deep in dim Nan Elmoth wood                                        
     lost and beyond recall he stood.                                        
     And there he saw her, fair and fay:                                     
     Ar-Melian, the Lady grey,                                               
     as silent as the windless trees,                                  635
     standing with mist about her knees,                                     
     and in her face remote the light                                        
     of Lorien glimmered in the night.                                       
     No word she spoke; but pace by pace,                                    
     a halting shadow, towards her face                                640
     forth walked the silver-mantled king,                                   
     tall Elu Thingol. In the ring                                           
     of waiting trees he took her hand.                                      
     One moment face to face they stand                                      
     alone, beneath the wheeling sky,                                   645
     while starlit years on earth go by                                      
     and in Nan Elmoth wood the trees                                        
     grow dark and tall. The murmuring seas                                  
     rising and falling on the shore                                         
     and Ulmo's horn he heeds no more.                                 650
                                                                            
       But long his people sought in vain                                    
     their lord, till Ulmo called again,                                     
     and then in grief they marched away,                                    
     leaving the woods. To havens grey                                       
     upon the western shore, the last                                  655
     long shore of mortal lands, they passed,                                
     and thence were borne beyond the Sea                                    

           in Aman, the Blessed Realm, to be                               
           by evergreen Ezellohar                                          
           in Valinor, in Eldamar.                                    66o
                                                                          
   52.    On  one  of   the  copies   of  D   Dungorthin  was   changed  to
          Dungortheb,  but  this  belongs  to  a  later  layer   of  nomen-
          clature and I have not introduced it into the text.              
   55.    Taur-nu-Fuin  C:  the  line as  written on  the B-text  still had
          Taur-na-Fuin.                                                    
  140.    Beor's  son:  changed  on  one  of  the  copies  of  D  to  the
          Beoring,  i.e.  a man  of Beor's  house. This  was a  change made
          when  the  genealogy  had  been  greatly  extended   and  Barahir
          was  no  longer  Beor's  son  but  his  remote   descendant  (see
          P. 198).                                                         
 249-330. In this section of the Canto the rewriting on (or  inserted into)
          the  B-text  exists  in  two  versions,  one the  immediate fore-
          runner  of  the  other. The  difference between  them is  that in
          the earlier Gorlim was  still, as  in the  earlier Lay,  taken to
          Angband  and  to  Morgoth  himself.  Thus  the  passage   in  the
          first  rewriting  corresponding   to  lines   255  -   66  reads:
          to        Angband        and        the         iron        halls
          where       laboured       Morgoth's       hopeless      thralls;
          and     there     with     bonds     on     hand     and     foot
          to grievous torment he was put                                   
                                                                          
            In what follows the two versions are the same, except that     
          in the first it is Morgoth, not Sauron: precisely the same lines
          are used of each. But  at lines  306-x x  the first  version has:
                                                                          
                       Then Gorlim wavered, and he drew                    
                       half back; but Morgoth's daunting eyes              
                       there held him. To the Lord of Lies                 
                       'tis vain in lies the breath to spend:              
                       as he began, so he must end,                        
                       and all must answer as he could                     
                                                                          
          and at lines 318-21 Morgoth says:                              
                                                                          
                       Thou fool! A phantom thou didst see                 
                       that Sauron my servant made to snare                
                       thy lovesick wits. Naught else was there.           
                       Cold 'tis with Sauron's wraiths to wed!             
                                                                          
         547. The word aghast is marked with an X in C (because Beren      
          was not aghast).                                                 

          
                                                                           
 567-8.    At first the passage in B (p. 167, lines 369 - 82) beginning No
          more his hidden bowstring sings was scarcely changed in           
          the rewriting, but as first written C had (old lines 376 - g):
          found him no more. The stars that burn                            
          about the North with silver fire                                  
          that Varda wrought, the Burning Briar                             
          as Men it called in days long gone                                
                                                                           
          Old lines 373 - 5 were then cut out and 376 - g rewritten:        
                                                                           
                     The stars that burn with silver fire                   
                     about the  North, the  Burning Briar                   
                     that Varda lit in ages gone                            
                                                                           
          This was in turn changed to the text given, lines 567 - 8.        
     581. In one of  the copies  of D  an X  is placed  against this  line. I
          think  this  was  probably   very  late   and  marks   my  father's
          changed  ideas  concerning  the  making  of   the  Sun   and  Moon.
     596. Nan  Elmoth:  in  the  preliminary  draft  the  name  of  the  wood
          was   first   Glad-uial,   emended   to  Glath-uial;   then  Gilam-
          moth,  emended  to  Nan  Elmoth.   It  was   here  that   the  name
          Nan Elmoth emerged.                                               
     627. In  one  of  the drafts  of this  passage the  line is  from Waking
          Water far away.                                                  
     634. In  one  of the  drafts of  this passage  Tar-Melian stands  in the
          margin as an alternative.                                         
                                                                           
                         Commentary on lines 1 - 660.                       
                                                                           
 A strictly  chronological account  of the  evolution of  the legends  of the
 Elder  Days  would  have  to  consider  several   other  works   before  the
 revisions  to  the  Lay  of  Leithian  were  reached.  By  treating  the Lay
 revised and unrevised as an entity and  not piecemeal  I jump  these stages,
 and names which had  in fact  emerged a  good while  before appear  here for
 the first time in this 'History'. I do little more than list them:         
                                                                           
   65. Menegroth
   89. elanor and niphredil. At line 125 is -a reference to the
       golden elanor.
   115. Middle-earth
   149 ff. The names of the men of Barahir's band, beside Beren and
           Gorlim: Dagnir, Ragnor, Radhruin, Dairuin, Gildor,
         Urthel, Arthad, Hathaldir; Belegund and Baragund.
         Belegund and Baragund are the sons of Bregolas (Barahir's
         brother); and Gorlim is the son of Angrim (199).
        All these names appear in The Silmarillion (pp. 155, 162).

       161.    'the fen of reedy Serech.' Beren came on the  Orcs at  the well
               of Rivil, which 'rises from the fell/down into Serech's reeds
               to flow' (434 - 5).                                            
       162.    Felagund is called  Inglor (Inglor  Felagund in  the sub-title,
                                                                             
               P 335).                                                        
                                                                             
 182,   560.   Dorthonion                                                     
 186.          Elbereth                                                      
 196,  etc.    (Tarn) Aeluin                                                 
 255,  etc.    Sauron                                                         
  259,347.     Gaurhoth. Cf. Tol-in-Gaurhoth 'Isle of Werewolves' in The      
               Silmarillion.                                                  
       434.    Rivil                                                          
       494.    Hador                                                          
       512.    Dagmor. Beren's sword is named nowhere else.                   
       519.    Gorgol the Butcher. He is named nowhere else.                  
       520.    Ladros (the lands to the north-east of Dorthonion that were
               granted by the Noldorin kings to the Men of the House of       
               Beor).                                                         
       520.    Drun. This name is marked on the later of the 'Silmarillion'
               maps (that on which the published map was based) as north      
               of Aeluin and west of Ladros, but is named in no other place.
       574.    Gorgorath. This has occurred in the prose outline for Canto
               X of the Lay, but in the form Corgoroth (p. 272).              
 596, etc.     Nan Elmoth. See note to line 596.                              
      634.     Ar-Melian (Tar-Melian). The name is not found elsewhere        
               with either prefix.                                            
      659.     Ezellohar (the Green Mound of the Two Trees in Valinor).       
                                                                             
   In addition may be noted here Dungorthin (52), where the new               
 version changes the old lines 49 - 50                                        
                                                                             
                     To North there lay the Land of Dread                     
                     whence only evil pathways led                            
                                                                             
 to                                                                           
                                                                             
                     To North there lay a land of dread,                      
                      Dungorthin where all ways were dead                     
                                                                             
 In the old version 'the Land of Dread'  clearly meant,  simply, 'the  land of
 Morgoth'.  Here  Dungorthin  is  placed  as  it  is  in The  Silmarillion (p.
 121),  between  the  Mountains  of  Terror  and  the  northern  bound  of the
 Girdle of Melian; see p. 314.                                                
                                                                             
   In  the  revised  Lay the  story of  Gorlim was  greatly developed.  In the
 old  (see  pp. 162  - 4,  169-70), Gorlim  left his  companions and  went 'to
 meet  / with  hidden friend  within a  dale', he  found 'a  homestead looming
 pale', and within it he saw a phantom of Eilinel. He left the house,  in fear

                                                                        
 of  Morgoth's  hunters  and  wolves,  and  returned  to  his  companions;  but
 after  some days  he deliberately  sought out  Morgoth's servants  and offered
 to  betray  his  fellows. He  was taken  to the  halls of Morgoth-who  does not
 say that the wraith was set to decoy Gorlim:                                 
                                                                             
                  a wraith of that which might have been,                     
                  methinks, it is that thou hast seen!                        
                                                                             
 (But in lines 241 - 2 it  is said  that 'men  believed that  Morgoth made/the
 fiendish phantom'.)                                                          
                                                                             
   There  is  also a  remarkable development  in the  revised Lay,  in that 'the
 XII  Beorings'  (one  would  expect  XIII,   including  Barahir   himself)  of
 Dorthonion  were  the  very  men  who  saved  King  Felagund  in   the  Battle
 of Sudden Flame:                                                             
                                                                             
                     For these it was, the chosen men                         
                     of Beor's house, who in the fen                          
                     of reedy Serech stood at bay                             
                     about King Inglor in the day                             
                     of his defeat...                                  (159-63)
                                                                             
   In?he  Silmarillion  the  story is  that 'Morgoth  pursued [Barahir)  to the
 death,  until  at  last  there  remained  to   him  only   twelve  companions'
 (p. 162): there is no  suggestion that  these survivors  were a  picked band,
 already joined as companions in an earlier heroic deed.                      
   Felagund  (Inglor)  is  now  said  to  have m  turned to  Nargothrond (lines
 166 - 7) after his rescue by Barahir and his men (see pp. 85-6).             
                                                                             
   From  this point  onwards substantial  rewriting of  the poem  is restricted
 to a few sections.                                                           
                                                                             
                             Canto III continued.                           
                                                                             
 From the end  of the  rewritten opening  of the  poem (line  660 above)  the D
 typescript continues as a copy of  B to  the end  of the  poem, but  though it
 was  certainly  made  under  my  father's  supervision  it  is  of  very minor
 textual value in itself.                                                     
   The  passage  in  the  original  text  (p.  173)  lines  453  (Thus  Thingol
 sailed  not on  the seas)  to 470 was left  unchanged; but  for lines  471 (In
 later  days  when  Morgoth first)  to  approximately  613  my  father substi-
 tuted 142 lines of new verse  (omitting the  long retrospective  passage lines
 563  ff.  concerning  Beren's  journey  over  the  Mountains  of  Terror),  in
 which  there  is  very  little of  the old  Lay, and  as the  passage proceeds
 progressively less. There is no doubt that these  lines are  (relatively) very
 late:  an  apparently  contemporaneous  piece  of  rewriting  in  Canto  X  is

  certainly post-1955 (see p.  360), and  they may  well be  considerably later
  than  that. There  is a  quantity of  rough draft  material in  manuscript but
  also a typescript made by my father of the first 103 lines, inserted into the
  D-text.                                                                       
                                                                               
                In later days, when Morgoth fled                                
                from wrath and raised once more his head                        
                and Iron Crown, his mighty seat                                 
                beneath the smoking mountain's feet                             
                founded and fortified anew,                                   5
                then slowly dread and darkness grew:                            
                the Shadow of the North that all                                
                the Folk of Earth would hold in thrall.                         
                The lords of Men to knee he brings,                             
                the kingdoms of the Exiled Kings                              10
                assails with ever-mounting war:                                 
                in their last havens by the shore                               
                they dwell, or strongholds walled with fear                     
                defend upon his borders drear,                                  
                till each one falls. Yet reign there still                   IS
                in Doriath beyond his will                                      
                the Grey King and immortal Queen.                               
                No evil in their realm is seen;                                 
                no power their might can yet surpass:                           
                there still is laughter and green grass,                     20
                there leaves are lit by the white sun,                          
                and many marvels are begun.                                     
                                                                               
                There went now in the Guarded Realm                             
                beneath the beech, beneath the elm,                             
                there lightfoot ran now on the green                         25
                the daughter of the king and queen:                             
                of Arda's eldest children born                                  
                in beauty of their elven-morn                                   
                and only child ordained by birth                               
                to walk in raiment of the Earth                              30
                from Those descended who began                                  
                before the world of Elf and Man.                                
                                                                               
                   Beyond the bounds of Arda far                                
                still shone the Legions, star on star,                          
                memorials of their labour long,                              35
                achievement of Vision and of Song;                              

         and when beneath their ancient light                                                
         on Earth below was cloudless night,                                                 
         music in Doriath awoke,                                                             
         and there beneath the branching oak,                                          40
         or seated on the beech-leaves brown,                                                
         Daeron the dark with ferny crown                                                    
         played on his pipes with elvish art                                                 
         unbearable by mortal heart.                                                         
             No other player has there been,                                           45
         no other lips or fingers seen                                                       
         so skilled, 'tis said in elven-lore,                                                
         save Maelor* son of Feanor,                                                          
         forgotten harper, singer doomed,                                                    
         who young when Laurelin yet bloomed                                           50
         to endless lamentation passed                                                       
         and in the tombless sea was cast.+                                                  
             But Daeron in his heart*s delight                                               
         yet lived and played by starlit night,                                              
         until one summer-eve befell,                                                  55
         as still the elven harpers tell.                                                    
         Then merrily his piping trilled;                                                    
         the grass was soft, the wind was stilled,                                           
         the twilight lingered faint and cool                                                
         in shadow-shapes upon the pool f                                              60
         beneath the boughs of sleeping trees                                                
         standing silent. About their knees                                                  
         a mist of hemlocks glimmered pale,                                                  
         and ghostly moths on lace-wings frail                                               
         went to and fro. Beside the mere                                              65
         quickening, rippling, rising clear                                                  
         the piping called. Then forth she came,                                             
         as sheer and sudden as a flame                                                      
         of peerless white the shadows cleaving,                                             
         her maiden-bower on white feet leaving;                                        70
         and as when summer stars arise                                                      
                                                                                            
 (* Both  Maglor  and  Maelor  appear  in  the draft  manuacripts of  this passage.  The final
 typescript   has  Maelor,   changed   to   Maglor,   but   not   I   think  by   my  father.
 + In The Silmarillion (p.254) it is not said that Maglor ended his life in  the sea:  he cast
 the Silmaril into the sea, 'and thereafter he wandered ever upon the shores, singing in pain
 and regret beside the waves'.                                                               
 | There is no other reference to a 'pool' or 'mere' at the  place in  the woods  where Beren
 came upon Luthien.)                                                                         

     radiant into darkened skies,                                         
     her living light on all was cast                                     
     in fleeting silver as she passed.                                    
     There now she stepped with elven pace,                            75
     bending and swaying in her grace,                                    
     as half-reluctant; then began                                        
     to dance, to dance: in mazes ran                                     
     bewildering, and a mist of white                                     
     was wreathed about her whirling flight.                           80
     Wind-ripples on the water flashed,                                   
     and trembling leaf and flower were plashed                           
     with diamond-dews, as ever fleet                                     
     and fleeter went her winged feet.                                     
                                                                         
     Her long hair as a cloud was streaming                            85
     about her arms uplifted gleaming,                                    
     as slow above the trees the Moon                                     
     in glory of the plenilune                                            
     arose, and on the open glade                                         
     its light serene and clear was laid.                              90
     Then suddenly her feet were stilled,                                 
     and through the woven wood there thrilled,                           
     half wordless, half in elven-tongue,                                 
     her voice upraised in blissful song                                  
     that once of nightingales she learned                           95
     and in her living joy had turned                                     
     to heart-enthralling loveliness,                                     
     unmarred, immortal, sorrowless.                                      
                                                                         
     Ir Ithil ammen Eruchin                                                
     menel-vir sila diriel                                          100
     si loth a galadh lasto din!                                          
     A Hir Annun gilthoniel,                                              
     le linnon im Tinuviel!                                               
                                                                         
 The typescript ends here, but the final manuscript draft continues:      
                                                                         
     O elven-fairest Luthien                                              
     what wonder moved thy dances then?                                105
     That night what doom of Elvenesse                                    
     enchanted did thy voice possess?                                     
     Such marvel shall there no more be                                   
     on Earth or west beyond the Sea,                                     

        at dusk or dawn, by night or noon                              110
        or neath the mirror of the moon!                                    
        On NeIdoreth was laid a spell;                                      
        the piping into silence fell,                                       
        for Daeron cast his flute away,                                     
        unheeded on the grass it lay,                                  115
        in wonder bound as stone he stood                                   
        heart-broken in the listening wood.                                 
        And still she sang above the night,                                 
        as light returning into light                                       
        upsoaring from the world below                                 120
        when suddenly there came a slow                                     
        dull tread of heavy feet on leaves,                                 
        and from the darkness on the eaves                                  
        of the bright glade a shape came out                                
        with hands agrope, as if in doubt                              125
        or blind, and as it stumbling passed                                
        under the moon a shadow cast                                        
        bended and darkling. Then from on high                              
        as lark falls headlong from the sky                                 
        the song of Luthien fell and ceased;                           130
        but Daeron from the spell released                                  
        awoke to fear, and cried in woe:                                    
        'Flee Luthien, ah Luthien go!                                       
        An evil walks the wood! Away! '                                     
        Then forth.he fled in his dismay                               135
        ever calling her to follow him,                                     
        until far off his cry was dim                                       
        'Ah flee, ah flee now, Luthien! '                                   
        But silent stood she in the glen                                    
        unmoved, who never fear had known,                             110
        as slender moonlit flower alone,                                    
        white and windless with upturned face                               
        waiting                                                             
                                                                           
 Here the manuscript comes to an end.                                       
                                                                           
                                    Canto IV.                               
                                                                           
 A small section of this Canto was partly rewritten at some late date. Lines
 884ff. were changed to:                                                    

          Then Thingol said: '0 Dairon wise,                                        
          with wary ears and watchful eyes,                                         
          who all that passes in this land                                          
          dost ever heed and understand,                                            
          what omen doth this silence bear?                                         
                                                                                   
 This  was  written  rapidly   on  the   B-text  and   was  primarily   prompted,  I
 think,  by  the  wish  to  get  rid  of  the  word  'magic' at  line 886,  which is
 underlined  and  marked  with  an  X  on  the  D  typescript.  At  the   same  time
 'wild  stallion'  at  893 was  changed to  'great stallion',  and Tavros  to Taurus
 at 891.  A little  further on,  lines 902  - 19  were changed,  also at  this time:
                                                                                   
          beneath the trees of Ennorath.*                                           
          Would it were so! An age now hath                                         
          gone by since Nahar trod this earth                                       
          in days of our peace and ancient mirth,                                   
          ere rebel lords of Eldamar                                                
          pursuing Morgoth from afar                                                
          brought war and ruin to the North.                                        
          Doth Tauros to their aid come forth?                                      
          But if not he, who comes or what?'                                        
          And Dairon said: 'He cometh riot!                                         
          No feet divine shall leave that shore                                     
          where the Outer Seas' last surges roar,                                   
          till many things be come to pass,                                         
          and many evils wrought. Alas!                                             
          the guest is here. The woods are still,                                   
          but wait not; for a marvel chill                                          
          them holds at the strange deeds they see,                                 
          though king sees not - yet queen, maybe,                                  
          can guess, and maiden doubtless knows                                     
          who ever now beside her goes.'                                            
                                                                                   
 Lines 926 - 9 were rewritten:                                                      
                                                                                   
          But Dairon looked on Luthien's face                                       
          and faltered, seeing his disgrace                                         
          in those clear eyes. He spoke no more,                                    
          and silent Thingol's anger bore.                                          
                                                                                   
 But  these  rewritings  were hasty,  at the  level of  rough draft,  and in  no way
 comparable to what has preceded.                                                   
                                                                                   
 (* Ennorath: 'Middle-earth'; cf. The Lord of the Rings, Appendix E (III.393, footnote t).

                                                          I
                                                                            
                                Cantos V - IX.                                
                                                                            
 There is no later recasting in these Cantos save for four lines in Canto IX:
 the dying words of Felagund to Beren (2633 ff.):                            
                                                                            
           I now must go to my long rest                                     
           in Aman, there beyond the shore                                   
           of Eldamar for ever more                                          
           in memory to dwell.' Thus died the king,                          
           as still the elven harpers sing.                                  
                                                                            
 At  this  point  my  father  wrote  on  one  of  the  copies  of  the  D-text:
 'He should give ring back to Beren'  (for the  later history  of the  ring see
 Unfinished  Tales  p.  171  note  2,  and  The  Lard of  the Rings  Appendix A,
 III. 322  note r  and 338).  But in  fact it  is nowhere  said that  Beren had
 returned the ring to Felagund.                                              
                                                                            
                                    Canto X                                  
                                                                            
 With  the  beginning  of  this  Canto  a  substantial  passage of  new writing
 begins, at first written on the B-text, and  then, with  further change,  in a
 typescript made by father, to all appearance at  the same  time as  that given
 on pp. 352 - 5 (but in this  case the  new verse  was retyped  as part  of the
 D-text).                                                                    
                                                                            
          Songs have recalled, by harpers sung                               
          long years ago in elven tongue,                                    
          how Luthien and Beren strayed                                      
          in Sirion's vale; and many a glade                                 
          they filled with joy, and there their feet                       5
          passed by lightly, and days were sweet.                            
          Though winter hunted through the wood,                             
          still flowers lingered where they stood.                           
          Tinuviel! Tinuviel!                                                
          Still unafraid the birds now dwell                            10
          and sing on boughs amid the snow                                   
          where Luthien and Beren go.                                        
                                                                            
          From Sirion's Isle they passed away,                               
          but on the hill alone there lay                                    
          a green grave, and a stone was set,                           15
          and there there lie the white bones yet                            
          of Finrod fair, Finarfin's son,                                    

        unless that land be changed and gone,                                                
        or foundered in unfathomed seas,                                                     
        while Finrod walks beneath the trees                                          20     
        in Eldamar* and comes no more                                                        
        to the grey world of tears and war.                                                  
                                                                                            
        To Nargothrond no more he came                                                       
        but thither swiftly ran the fame                                                     
        of their dead king and his great deed,                                        25     
        how Luthien the Isle had freed:                                                      
        the Werewolf Lord was overthrown,                                                    
        and broken were his towers of stone.                                                 
        For many now came home at last                                                       
        who long ago to shadow passed;                                                30     
        and like a shadow had returned                                                       
        Huan the hound, though scant he earned                                               
        or praise or thanks of Celegorm.                                                     
             There now arose a growing storm,                                                
        a clamour of'many voices loud,                                                35     
        and folk whom Curufin had cowed                                                      
        and their own king had help denied,                                                  
        in shame and anger now they cried:                                                   
        'Come! Slay these faithless lords untrue!                                            
        Why lurk they here? What will they do,                                        40     
        but bring Finarfin's kin to naught,                                                  
        treacherous cuckoo-guests unsought?                                                  
        Away with them! ' But wise and slow                                                  
        Orodreth spoke: 'Beware, lest woe                                                    
        and wickedness to worse ye bring!                                             45     
        Finrod is fallen. I am king.                                                         
        But even as he would speak, I now                                                    
        command you. I will not allow                                                        
        in Nargothrond the ancient curse                                                     
        from evil unto evil worse                                                     50     
        to work. With tears for Finrod weep                                                  
        repentant! Swords for Morgoth keep!                                                  
        No kindred blood shall here be shed.                                                 
        Yet here shall neither rest nor bread                                                
        the brethren find who set at naught                                             55
                                                                                            
 (* Eldamar: earlier reading the Blessed Realm.- With these lines cf. the revised version
 of Felagund's dying words in Canto IX (p. 357).)                                             

     Finarfin's house. Let them be sought,                              
     unharmed to stand before me! Go!                                   
     The courtesy of Finrod show! '                                     
                                                                       
     In scorn stood Celegorm, unbowed,                                  
     with glance of fire in anger proud                             60
     and menacing; but at his side                                      
     smiling and silent, wary-eyed,                                     
     was Curufin, with hand on haft                                     
     of his long knife. And then he laughed,                            
     and 'Well?'said he. 'Why didst thou call                       65
     for us, Sir Steward? In thy hall                                   
     we are not wont to stand. Come, speak,                             
     if aught of us thou hast to seek! '                                
                                                                       
     Cold words Orodreth answered slow:                                 
     'Before the king ye stand. But know,                           70
     of you he seeks for naught. His will                               
     ye come to hear, and to fulfil.                                    
     Be gone for ever, ere the day                                      
     shall fall into the sea! Your way                                  
     shall never lead you hither more,                              75
     nor any son of Feanor;                                             
     of love no more shall there be bond                                
     between your house and Nargothrond! '                              
                                                                       
     'We will remember it,' they said,                                  
     and turned upon their heels, and sped,                         80
     saddled their horses, trussed their gear,                          
     and went with hound and bow and spear,                             
     alone; for none of all the folk                                    
     would follow them. No word they spoke,                             
     but sounded horns, and rode away                               85
     like wind at end of stormy day.                                    
                                                                       
 The typescript made by my father ends here, but the revision written on
 the B-text continues (and was incorporated in the D typescript).       
                                                                       
     Towards Doriath the wanderers now                                  
     were drawing nigh. Though bare was bough,                          
     and winter through the grasses grey                                
     went hissing chill, and brief was day,                         90
     they sang beneath the frosty sky                                   

     above them lifted clear and high.                                       
     They came to Mindeb swift and bright                                    
     that from the northern mountains' height                                
     to Neldoreth came leaping down                                     95
     with noise among the boulders brown,                                    
     but into sudden silence fell,                                           
     passing beneath the guarding spell                                      
     that Melian on the borders laid                                         
     of Thingol's land. There now they stayed;                         100
     for silence sad on Beren fell.                                          
     Unheeded long, at last too well                                         
     he heard the warning of his heart:                                      
     alas, beloved, here we part.                                            
     'Alas, Tinuviel,' he said,                                        105
     'this road no further can we tread                                      
     together, no more hand in hand                                          
     can journey in the Elven-land.'                                         
     'Why part we here? What dost thou say,                                  
     even at dawn of brighter day? '                                   110
                                                                            
  From   lines   2936   to  2965   no  further   changes  were   made  (except
 Elfinesse  to  Elvenesse  at   2962).  In   the  preceding   passage,  Inglor
 Felagund  son  of  Finrod  has  become  Finrod  Felagund  son   of  Finarfin,
 which dates the revision to, at earliest, 1955, for the change had  not been
 made in the first edition of The Lord of the Rings.                         
  A  further  short  stretch  of rewriting  begins at  2966, returning  to the
 original text two lines later:                                              
                                                                            
     My word, alas! I now must keep,                                         
     and not the first of men must weep                                      
     for oath in pride and anger sworn.                                      
     Too brief the meeting, brief the morn,                                  
     too soon comes night when we must part!                              5
     All oaths are for breaking of the heart,                                
     with shame denied, with anguish kept.                                   
     Ah! would that now unknown I slept                                      
     with Barahir beneath the stone,                                         
     and thou wert dancing still alone,                                  10
     unmarred, immortal, sorrowless,                                         
     singing in joy of Elvenesse.'                                           
                                                                            
          'That may not be. For bonds there are                              
     stronger than stone or iron bar,                                        

              more strong than proudly spoken oath.                   IS
              Have I not plighted thee my troth?                         
              Hath love no pride nor honour then?                        
              Or dost thou deem then Luthien                             
              so frail of purpose, light of love?                        
              By stars of Elbereth above!                             20
              If thou wilt here my hand forsake                          
              and leave me lonely paths to take,                         
              then Luthien will not go home...                           
                                                                        
 At the same time line 2974 was changed to                               
                                                                        
              beyond all hope in love once more                          
                                                                        
 and 2988 ff. to                                                         
                                                                        
                                             In rage and haste           
              thus madly eastward they now raced,                        
              to find the old and perilous path                          
              between the dreadful Gorgorath                             
              and Thingol's realm. That was their road                   
              most swift to where their kin abode                        
              far off, where Himring's watchful hill                     
              o'er Aglon's gorge hung tall and still.                    
                                                                        
                  They saw the wanderers. With a shout                   
              straight on them turned their steeds about...              
                                                                        
                                 Cantos XI - XIII.                       
                                                                        
 There is no rewriting in Cantos XI and XII, but a little towards the end
 of XIII. Lines 4092 - 5 were replaced by:                               
                                                                        
             the Silmarils with living light                             
             were kindled clear, and waxing bright                       
             shone like the stars that in the North                      
             above the reek of earth leap forth.                         
                                                                        
 Lines 4150 - 9 were replaced by:                                        
                                                                        
             In claws of iron the gem was caught;                        
             the knife them rent, as they were naught                    

      but brittle nails on a dead hand.                        
      Behold! the hope of Elvenland,                           
      the fire of Feanor, Light of Morn                      5
      before the sun and moon were born,                       
      thus out of bondage came at last,                        
      from iron to mortal hand it passed.                      
      There Beren stood. The jewel he held,                    
      and its pure radiance slowly welled                    10
      through flesh and bone, and turned to fire             
      with hue of living blood. Desire                         
      then smote his heart their doom to dare,                 
      and from the deeps of Hell to bear                       
      all three immortal gems, and save                      IS
      the elven-light from Morgoth's grave.                    
      Again he stooped; with knife he strove;                  
      through band and claw of iron it clove.                  
      But round the Silmarils dark Fate                        
      was woven: they were meshed in hate,                   20
      and not yet come was their doomed hour                   
      when wrested from the fallen power                       
      of Morgoth in a ruined world,                            
      regained and lost, they should be hurled                 
      in fiery gulf and groundless sea,                      25
      beyond recall while Time shall be.                       
                                                              
                            Canto XIV.                         
                                                              
 Lines 4185 - go were rewritten:                               
                                                              
      At last before them far away                             
      they saw a glimmer, faint and grey                       
      of ghostly light that shivering fell                     
      down from the yawning gates of Hell.                     
      Then hope awoke, and straightway died -                  
      the doors were open, gates were wide;                    
      but on the threshold terror walked.                      
      The dreadful wolf awake there stalked }                  
      The wolf awake there watchful stalked }                  
      and in his eyes the red fire glowered;                   
      there Carcharoth in menace towered,                      
      a waiting death, a biding doom:                          

 Lines 4208-11 were rewritten:                                               
                                                                            
                  and Beren in despair then strode                           
                  past Luthien to bar the road,                              
                  unarmed, defenceless, to defend                            
                  the elven-maid until the end.                              
                                        *                                   
    Of  the original  Lay scarcely  more than  a sixth  is represented  in the
 rewriting, and the proportion of new verse to old is less than a  quarter; so
 that  Humphrey   Carpenter's  statement   in  The   Inklings,  p.   31,  that
 'Eventually,  indeed,  he  came  to rewrite  the whole  poem' must,  alas, be
 corrected.                                                                  

                           Note on the original submission of the                           
                            Lay of Leithian and The Silmarillion                            
                                          in  1937.                                         
                                                                                           
 In the wake of the immediate success of The  Hobbit, which  was published                  
 on 21  September 1937,  Stanley Unwin,  the chairman  of George  Allen &                   
 Unwin, was naturally anxious that my  father should  produce a  sequel or                  
 successor - about hobbits. The result of the first meeting  between them,                  
 not long after the publication of the book,  was that  my father  sent in                  
 various manuscripts, among them the Lay of Leithian  (referred to  in the                  
 correspondence of  that time  as the  Gest(e) of  Beren and  Luthien) and                  
 The Silmarillion.                                                                          
  Humphrey  Carpenter  says  in  his  Biography (p.  183) that  'the manu-                  
 script [of The Silmarillion] - or rather, the bundle of manuscripts - had                  
 arrived in a somewhat disordered state, and  the only  clearly continuous                  
 section seemed to  be the  long poem  "The Gest  of Eeren  and Luthien".'                  
 Rayner Unwin has told me  that in  the record  kept by  Allen L  Unwin of                  
 incoming  manuscripts  the  works  delivered  on  15  November  1937 were                  
 listed as:                                                                                 
                                                                                           
  x Farmer Giles of Ham                                                                     
    Long Poem                                                                               
    Mr Bliss                                                                                
    The Gnomes Material                                                                     
    The Lost Road                                                                           
                                                                                           
 Notes  of  my  father's show that  together with  The Silmarillion  'proper' he              
 sent  at  this  time  Ainulindale  (The  Music  of  the   Ainur),  Ambarkanta              
 (The  Shape  of  the  World),  and  The  Fall  of  the  Numenoreans.  I think              
 that this is  why the  fourth item  in the  record book  was written  down as              
 'The  Gnomes  Material'.  It  may  be  that  the  different  manuscripts were              
 not very clearly differentiated, while the title-pages of the different works              
 would  certainly  seem  obscure;  and  'The  Gnomes  Material'  was   a  con-              
 venient  covering  phrase.*  But  perhaps  one  may  detect in  it a  note of              
 helplessness as well, apparent also in the description of item  z as  a 'Long              
 Poem'.  -  On the  other hand,  it should  be mentioned  that the  text of?he              
 Silmarillion was at that time a  fine, simple,  and very  legible manuscript.              
                                                                                           
 (* There is.no question that The Silmarillion itself did go to  Allen R  Unwin at  this time.
 My father made a note while it was gone about changes to be made to it when it came back to
 him, and he specifically acknowledged the return  of it (Letters p.  27): 'I  have received
 safely... the Geste (in verse) and the Silmarillion and related fragments.'                

                                                                         
                                       
                                                                             
 There  is  no  evidence  that  The Silmarillion  and the  other Middle-earth
 prose  works  were  submitted  to  the  publishers'  reader.  In his  report on
 the poem he referred only to 'a few pages'  and 'some  pages' in  prose, and
 Stanley   Unwin,   when   he   returned   the   manuscripts on   15  December
 I937,  mentioned  'the  pages  of  a  prose  version'  which  accompanied the
 poem.   Humphrey   Carpenter   seems  certainly   right  in   his  suggestion
 (Biography  p.  184)  that  these  pages  were attached  'for the  purpose of
 completing  the  story,  for  the  poem  itself  was  unfinished';  they were
 pages  from  the  story of  Beren and  Luthien as  told in  The Silmarillion.
 But it is also obvious from the reader's report that he  saw nothing  else of
 The   Silmarillion.  He   headed  his   report:  'The  Geste  of   Beren  and
 Luthien (Retold in Verse by? )', and began:                                  
  I am rather at a loss to know what to do with  this -  it doesn't  even seem
 to  have  an  author!  -  or  any  indication  of  sources,  etc. Publishers'
 readers  are  rightly  supposed  to  be  of  moderate intelligence  and read-
 ing;  but  I  confess my  reading has  not extended  to early  Celtic Gestes,
 and  I  don't  even  know  whether this  is a  famous Geste  or not,  or, for
 that matter, whether it is  authentic. I  presume it  is, as  the unspecified
 versifier  has  included  some  pages  of  a  prose-version  (which   is  far
 superior).                                                                  
                                                                             
 By  the  last  sentence he  meant, I  think, that  the story,  as represented
 in  what  he  took to  be a  close prose  translation, was  authentic 'Celtic
 Geste', and that 'the  unspecified versifier'  had proceeded  to make  a poem
 out of it.                                                                   
  However,  he  was  a critic  positive in  his taste,  and he  contrasted the
 poem,  greatly  to  its  disadvantage,  with 'the  few pages  of (presumably)
 prose transcript from the  original'. In  the poem,  he said,  'the primitive
 strength is gone, the clear colours are gone' - a notable conclusion, even if
 the  actual evolution  of the  Matter of  Beren and  Luthien was  thus turned
 onto its head.                                                               
  It  may  seem  odd  that  the  reader  who  was given  the poem  should have
 had  so  little to  go on;  even odder,  that he  wrote with  some enthusiasm
 about the  fragment of  prose narrative  that accompanied  it, yet  never saw
 the  work  from  which  the  fragment   came,  though   that  was   the  most
 important  manuscript  sent  in by  the author:  he had  indeed no  reason to
 suspect its  existence. But  I would  guess that  my father  had not  made it
 sufficiently  clear  at  the outset  what the  Middle-earth prose  works were
 and  how  they  related  to  each  other, and  that as  a result  'the Gnomes
 Material' had been set aside as altogether too peculiar and difficult.       
                                                                             
        At the bottom of the reader's report Charles Furth of Allen R Unwin
 wrote: 'What do we do?'; and  it was  left to  the tact  of Stanley  Unwin to
 devise a way. When he returned the manuscripts to my father he said:         
                                                                             
         As you yourself surmised, it is going to be a difficult task to do
        anything with the Geste of Beren and Luthien in verse form, but our

 reader is much impressed with the pages of a prose version that                            
 accompanied it                                                                             
                                                                                           
 - and  he quoted  from the  report only  the approving  (if misdirected)                   
 remarks  which  the  reader  had made  about the  Silmarillion fragment,                   
 and  which Humphrey  Carpenter quotes-  'It has  something of  that mad,                   
 bright-eyed beauty that perplexes all Anglo-Saxons in the face of Celtic                   
 art,' &c. But Stanley Unwin then went on to say:                                           
                                                                                           
 ?he Silmarillion contains plenty of wonderful material; in fact it is a                    
 mine to be explored  in writing  further books  like The  Hobbit rather                    
 than a book in itself.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 These  words  effectively  show  in themselves  that The  Silmarillion had                 
 not  been  given  to a  reader and  reported on.  At that  time it  was an                 
 extremely  coherent  work,  though  unfinished  in  that  version.* Beyond                 
 question, Stanley Unwin's object was to save  my father's  feelings, while                 
 (relying on the reader's report - which concerned the poem)  rejecting the                 
 material  submitted,  and  to  persuade  him  to write  a book  that would                 
 continue the success of The Hobbit. But the result was that my father was                 
 entirely misled; for in his reply of 16  December 1937  (given in  full in                 
 Letters  pp. 26  - 7)  - three  days before  he wrote  saying that  he had                 
 completed  the first  chapter, 'A  Long-expected Party',  of 'a  new story                 
 about Hobbits' - he said:                                                                  
                                                                                           
 My chief joy comes from learning that the  Silmarillion is  not rejected                   
 with scorn... I do not mind about the  verse-form [i.e.  the verse-form                   
 of the tale of Beren and Luthien, the Lay of Leithian] which in spite of                   
 certain virtuous passages has grave defects, for it is  only for  me the                   
 rough material.+ But I shall certainly now hope one day  to be  able, or                   
 to be able to afford, to publish the Silmarillion!                                         
                                                                                           
 He  was  quite  obviously under  the impression  that The  Silmarillion had                
 been given to a reader and  reported on  (no doubt  he saw  no significance                
 in Stanley Unwin's phrase 'the pages of a prose  version'); whereas  so far                
 as the existing evidence goes (and it seems sufficiently complete) this was                
 not the case at all. He thought it had been read  and rejected,  whereas it                
 had  merely  been rejected.  The reader  had certainly  rejected the Lay of                
 Leithian;  he  had  not  rejected The  Silmarillion, of  which he  had only                
 seen a few pages  (not knowing  what they  were), and  in any  case enjoyed                
 them - granting the difficulties that an Anglo-Saxon finds  in appreciating                
 Celtic art.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 (* There was not in fact a great deal more  to be  done in  reworking the 1930 text:  the new
 version  extended  (in  some 40,000  words)  to  part  way  through  Chapter XXI,  Of Turin
 Turambar.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 + This may seem a rather surprising thing to say; but  it is  to be  remembered that  he had
 abandoned the poem six years before, and was at this time absorbed in the perfecting of the
 proee Silmarillion.)                                                                        

 
                                                                             
   It  is  strange  to  reflect  on  what the  outcome might  conceivably have
 been if The Silmarillion  actually had  been read  at that  time, and  if the
 reader  had  maintained  the  good opinion  he formed  from those  few pages;
 for while  there is  no necessary  reason to  suppose even  so that  it would
 have been accepted for publication, it does  not seem  absolutely out  of the
 question. And if it had been? My father wrote long after  (in 1946, Letters
                                                                             
 P. 346):                                                                     
                                                                             
   I  then  [after the  publication of  The Hobbit]  offered them  the legends
   of  the  Elder  Days, but  their readers  turned that  down. They  wanted a
   sequel.  But  I  wanted  heroic legends  and high  romance. The  result was
   The Lord of the Rings.                                                      

                         GLOSSARY OF OBSOLETE, ARCHAIC,                       
                          AND RARE WORDS AND MEANINGS.                        
                                                                             
 In this list words occurring  in the  Lay of  the Children  of Hurin  (H, and
 the  second  version  H  ii)  and  in  the Lay  of Leithian  (L, and  the con-
 tinuous part of the later rewriting L ii) are referenced  to the  lines; words
 from  other  poems  or  passages  are referenced  to the  pages on  which they
 occur.                                                                       
  Both  Lays,  but  especially  The  Children  of  Hurin,  make  use   of  some
 totally lost words  (and lost  meanings), but  the list  includes also  a good
 many  that  remain  well-known  literary  archaisms,   and  some   words  that
 are neither but are of very limited currency.                                
                                                                             
 an if, H 63, 485.                                                            
 as as if, H 310, ii. 659.                                                   
 astonied astounded, H 578.                                                   
 bade H ii.646. If This Thingol she bade means 'This she offered to            
 Thingol' the word is used in two senses within the line: she bade            
 (offered) him the helm, and bade (asked) him to receive her                  
 thanks', but more probably the line means 'she asked him to receive          
 it, and her thanks' (cf. H 301).                                             
 bale evil, woe, torment, H 56, ii. 81.                                       
 balusters the pillars of a balustrade, p. 132.                               
 bated restrained, held in, H 1121.                                           
 bent open place covered with grass, H 1032, 1517, 1539, ii. 500;             
 L 1369, 2281.                                                                
 betid come to pass, L 2408                                                   
 blent mingled, H 453, 583; L ii. 317.                                       
 boots in it boots not, it is of no use, H 1871.                              
 bosmed (in bare-bosmed) bosomed, H 1198.                                    
 brand blade, sword, H 1340, ii. 149.                                         
 carping talk, chatter, H 477; carped H 506.                                  
 casque helmet, H ii. 655.                                                    
 chaplet garland, L 753                                                       
 chase hunting-grounds, L 3297                                                
 clomb old past tense of climb, H 1494; L 1382, 3872.                          
 corse  corpse, H 1295, 1404; L 3620.                                         
 cozening beguiling or defrauding, p. 305.                                    
 croft enclosed plot of arable land, L 1968.                                  
 dear precious, valuable, H 480.                                              
 dolour suffering, L 2814.                                                    
 dolven (also in dark(ly)-, deep-dolven) delved, dug, H 2052; L 213,          
     1677, 11. 63.                                                            

                                                                 
                                                                      
 dreed           endured,           suffered,  H  531.
 drouth  (the  same  word  in  origin  as drought)  dryness, H  946, 972;
 (plains   of,   fields   of)   drouth,   thirst,   H   826;   L   2047.
 eld  old  age,  H  ii.  595;  of  eld,  of  old,  H  x  x  8,  ii. 262.
 enfurled   (in   mist-enfurled)   enveloped,  swathed   (in  something
 twisted or folded), L 59,  ii.61. The  word is  not recorded  with the
 prefix  en-.  Cf.  furled,  wrapped,  L  1551,  unfurled,  opened out,
 L 404, 1591, 3986.                                                    
 enow  enough, L 1304.                                                 
 error (probably) wandering, H ii. 495.                                
 fain gladly, H 130; L 823; glad, L ii.368; fain of eager for, or     
 well-pleased with, H 410, 458, ii. 786; warfain eager for war,        
 H 386, 1664, ii. 137, bloodfain ii. 750; I had fainer I would like it
 better, H ii. 146.                                                    
 falchion (broad) sword, H 1217, ii.63, 146                            
 fallow golden brown, H 2106; pp. 128 - g; fallow-gold p. 129;         
 fallow deer L 86. (A distinct word from fallow of ground.)            
 fare journeying, H 2184.                                              
 fast fixedly, unmovingly, H 1614 (or perhaps adjective qualifying     
 pondering, deep, unbroken, cf. fast asleep); secure against           
 attack, L 360.                                                         
 fell hide, L 2344, 3398, 3458, 3484, 3941, 4I24, ii. 528.              
 fey death-bound, L 3305; see unfey.                                   
 flittermouse bat, L 4074.                                             
 fold land, H 765; folds H 533, 1632 probably the same, but perhaps     
 'windings'.                                                           
 force waterfall, H 1595.                                              
 forhungered starved, L 3076.                                          
 forwandered worn out by wandering, H 190, 897, ii.498; L 550,         
   2354.                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *354
 freshets small streams of fresh water, H 1597; L 1934.                
 frith wood, woodland, H 1795; p. 132; L 896, 2264, ii. 124.          
 frore frosty, H ii. 594; very cold, L 578, 1718.                       
 garth enclosed ground beside a house, garden, yard, H 149, ii. 313.
 ghyll deep rocky ravine, H 1498.                                      
 glaive lance, or sword, H 322, 1210, ii.680.                          
 glamoury magic, enchantment, pp. 122 - 3;L 2073.                      
 gloam twilight, p. 146.                                               
 grasses plants, herbs, L 3122.                                        
 guerdon recompense, H 658; L 222, 1064, 4139.                          
 haggard (of clothes) ragged, disordered, H 466; (of hills) wild,      
 H 2120, L 3167; modern meaning H 1890, L 3720 (in transferred          
 sense, haggard hunger, haggard care H I437, L 564)                     
 haled drew, pulled out, H ii. 551.                                    
 hap fortune, lot, condition, H 340.                                   
 hest command, H 86, 689.                                              

 hie hasten, H 838.                                                   
 hight called, named, H 366, 863.                                      
 hold fastness, stronghold, L 52, 1702, 2457; p. 134 (or perhaps      
 'grasp'); refuge, L 210.                                             
 holt wood, copse, L 2342.                                            
 inane empty, void, L 3533.                                           
 keep central part of the stronghold, L 1677.                         
 lambent of flame, playing on a surface without burning, H 1217.      
 lapped hemmed in, H 690; enfolded, H 709.                            
 lea grassland, H 35, 1797, ii. 66.                                   
 leasows meadows, H 1797.                                             
 leeches physicians, L 3055, 3144.                                    
 let hinder, L 2019.                                                  
 levin lightning, H 1681.                                             
 lief willing, L 3417; lievet better, more delightful, H 78.         
 like please, H go, 286, 598, 1376, ii. 226, 626 (but 'like' H 616)
 lind linden, lime-tree, p. 120.                                      
 loath hateful to, L 3419; unwilling, L 3417.                         
 lode path, road, H 798.                                              
 louted bent, bowed, H 1520.                                          
 march borderland, H ii. 493; L 3672.                                 
 marge margin, H 1555.                                                
 mavis song-thrush, L ii. 74.                                         
 meed reward, requital, H 81, 268, 701, 793, ii. I95, 231, 604.       
 meet fitting, H 487.                                                 
 mete deal out (used in the construction I shall mete thee a meed, his
 meed was meted) H Sr, 532, 7O1 1092, ii. 195.                      
 mews seagulls, p. 129; seamew H 1551.                                
 neb beak, bill, L 255, 570, ii. 381, 409.                            
 nesh soft, tender, L 4220.                                           
 opes  opens, L 3740; oped H 550.                                     
 or ever before ever, L 1821.                                         
 or... or either... or, H 439 - 40 L 54, 2886; p. 359                 
 outer utter, uttermost (?), L 2079.                                  
 palfrey small saddle-horse, L 3379.                                  
 parlous perilous, dangerous, L ii. 456.                              
 pled old past tense of plead, L 2983.                                
 pleniluae full moon, p. 354.                                         
 prate chatter, talk to no purpose, H 501.                            
 quick living, alive, H ii. 78.                                       
 quod (quoth), said, H 88.                                             
 quook old past tense of quake, L 3582.                                
 recked cared, H 619; L ii. 629; unrecked unheeded, disregarded,       
 H 1799.                                                               
 redeless without resource, devoid of counsel, L 3427.                
 rive cleave, H 1211; past tense rove, L 4149.                       

  roamed wandered, went (of a path or journey), H 1432; extended (?)        
  (of regions), H 1577. (These usages appear to be unrecorded.)             
  rout company, troop, band, L 2997.                                        
  rove see rive.                                                            
  ruel-bone some kind of ivory, L 2261 (cf. J. R. R. Tolkien, Sir           
  Gawain, Pearl, and Sir Orfeo, translation of Pearl stanza 18: And         
  her hue as rewel ivoty man).                                              
  nath pity, compassion, H 306, 1941, 1969, 2134, ii.654; L 116;              
  remorse, H 509; sorrow, H 1661                                            
  shaws woods, thickets, H 647 (cf. the Trollshaws west of Rivendell).     
  sheer (of light) bright, L 689; (of water) clear and pure, L 1439.        
  shoon old plural of shoe, L 490.                                          
  shores supports, props, L 3880.                                           
  sigaldry sorcery, L 2072 (cf. stanza 3 of the poem Errantry, in J. R. R.
  Tolkien, The Adventures of Tom Bombadil, 1962).                           
  slade valley, dell, H 235, I 150 2171 ii. 561; s1ades of death H 685,     
      886.                                                                  
  slot track, trail (of a hunted creature), H 745, 1314                     
  alough mire, mud, H 881.                                                  
  sped availed (attained his purpose), H 41; prospered (transitive),        
  H 247, (intransitive) ii. 574; pressed, urged on, H 284; sent with        
  haste, H 654.                                                             
  stared (probably) shone, L 3I32 a meaning of the verb found in the        
  mediaeval alliterative poems: cf. J. R. R. Tolkien, Sir Gawain,           
  Pearl, and Sir Orfeo, translation of Pearl stanza 10: stars stare in      
  the welkin in minter night, where the original has staren with            
  this meaning.                                                             
  strikes runs, flows, H 240, 520, ii. 567.                                 
  suage assuage, relieve, H 612.                                            
  sued petitioned for, appealed for, H 857.                                 
  swath 'the space covered by a sweep of the mower's scythe' (O.E.D.),      
  H 33, ii.64; L 2106.                                                      
  swinking toiling, H 784.                                                  
  sylphine of the nature of a sylph (spirit inhabiting the air, see p. 306),
  L 4077. (This adjective to sylph is not recorded.)                        
  tale count, amount, sum, H 159, 471, ii. 326. Cf. untold uncounted,       
  H ii. 678, L 12, 2251.                                                    
  targe shield, H 13 I 409, 2 I 53, it. 284, 785.                           
  thewed in mighty-thewed, of great strength, with mighty sinews,          
  H ii. 714.                                                                
  thirled pierced, H 697.                                                   
  tilth cultivated land, H 1798.                                            
  tors rocky hill-tops, H 2119.                                            
  travail hardship (as endured on a journey, i.e. both travail and          
  travel), H xyg, ii. 300.                                                  
  unfey not 'fey', not fated to die, H ii. 752 (or possibly the meaning is

  'not feeble, not timid', reversing another  sense of  fey). This  word is
  apparently  not  recorded  in English,  but u-feigr  'unfey' is  found in
  Old Norse.                                                              
 unkempt uncombed, H 490.                                                 
 unreeked see reeked.                                                     
 wading going, passing, H 1605.                                           
 waiviag refusing, rejecting, H ii. 154.                                  
 wallet bag for provisions, H 228, ii. 551.                               
 wan dark, L 261, ii. 561.                                              
 wanhope  despair, H 188.                                                 
 web woven fabric, L 1471l; used of ring-mail L 324, and of the          
 'weavings' of fate H ii. 13.                                             
 weeds clothes, H 445.                                                    
 weft woven fabric, L 3061.                                              
 weird fate, doom, H 160, ii. 119, 246, 327; L 2290, 3173.               
 weregild the price to be paid in compensation for the killing of a man,
 varying according to his rank, L ii. 177.                                
 whin gorse, L ii. 195.                                                  
 wieldy (capable of easily wielding body or weapon), vigorous, agile,
 H 1765.                                                                  
 wildered lost, H 188, 204, 1316, ii.516; p. 146; bewildered, H 774; L
 641 (see p. 323).                                                        
 minding (1) of the motion of wind or water (without any necessary        
 suggestion of twisting), H 769, 1857. (2) (of trumpet) blowing,           
 H 1832.                                                                  
 wist see wot.                                                            
 mold forested hills or uplands (see p. 88), H 1816, 1992, 1994; L 1742.
 wolfham(e) wolfskin, L 3398; pp. 271 - 3, 283 (see p. 271).              
 woof woven fabric, L 4149.                                               
 wot (present tense of verb wit), know, H 204, ii. 516; past tense wist
 knew, H 160, 200, 399, ii.327; past participle unwiet unknown,           
 H 257.                                                                   
 wrack (1) ruin, disaster, destruction, H 27, 629, 2036, ii. 120; p. 142.
 (2) seaweed, H 1569                                                      
 wrights craftsmen, H 300 I 147, ii. 641, 671.                            
