                              FOREWORD.                           
                                                                 
 In 'The History of Middle-earth' I  have tried  to make  each book
 as  much  an  independent  entity  as possible,  and not  merely a
 section cut off when the book had reached a  certain size;  but in
 the  history  of  the writing  of The  Lord of  the Rings this has
 proved  difficult.  In  The  Return of  the Shadow  I was  able to
 bring the story to the point where my father, as he  said, 'halted
 for  a  long while'  while the  Company of  the Ring  stood before
 the  tomb  of Balin  in the  mines of  Khazad-dum; but  this meant
 leaving till later the further  complex restructurings  of earlier
 parts of The Fellowship of the Ring that belong to that period.
  In this  volume my  hope and  intention was  to reach  the second
 major  halt  in  the  writing  of The  Lord of  the Rings.  In the
 Foreword to  the Second  Edition my  father said  that in  1942 he
 'wrote the first drafts of the matter that now stands as  Book III
 [the story  from 'The  Departure of  Boromir' to  'The Palantir'],
 and  the  beginnings  of  Chapters  1  and  3  of  Book  V ['Minas
 Tirith'  and  'The  Muster of  Rohan']; and  there as  the beacons
 flared  in  Anorien  and  Theoden  came  to Harrowdale  I stopped.
 Foresight had failed and there was no time for thought.'  It seems
 to  have  been  around the  end of  1942 that  he stopped,  and he
 began again ('I forced myself to  tackle the  journey of  Frodo to
 Mordor')  at the  beginning of  April 1944,  after an  interval of
 well over a year.                                                
  For this reason I chose as a title for this  book The  Treason of
 Isengard, that being a title my father had  proposed for  Book III
 (the first Book of The  Two Towers)  in a  letter to  Rayner Unwin
 of March 1953 (The Letters of  J. R.  R. Tolkien  no. 136).  But I
 have found repeatedly that a history  of the  writing of  The Lord
 of the Kings tends to set its own pace and  scale, and  that there
 comes a sort of critical  point beyond  which condensation  of the
 intricacies  of the  evolving structure  is not  possible, without
 changing the nature of the enterprise. Finding that the  story was
 not  moving  rapidly  enough to  reach the  great ride  of Gandalf
 with Pippin on Shadowfax before I ran  out of  space, I  rewrote a
 great part of the book in an attempt  to shorten  it; but  I found

 that if I rejected material as being less essential or of  less interest
 I  was  always  confronted  at  a   later  point   with  the   need  for
 explanations   that  destroyed   my  gains.   Finally  I   decided  that
 'The  King  of  the   Golden  Hall'   does  in   fact  provide   a  very
 suitable   stopping-place,   not   in   terms   of   the   movement   of
 composition  but  in  terms  of  the  movement  of  the  story;   and  I
 have  retained  the  title  The  Treason   of  Isengard,   because  that
 was  the  central  new  element  in  this  part  of  The  Lord   of  the
 Rings,  even  though  in  this  book  the  account  of  the  destruction
 of   Isengard   and   the   reward   of   Saruman's  betrayal   is  only
 reached in a preliminary outline.                                      
   Of  course  it  would  be   possible  to   shorten  my   account  very
 considerably   by   treating   such  matters   as  the   chronology  and
 geography  far  more  superficially,  but  as  I  know  well  there  are
 some   who  find   these   often   exceedingly   complex   questions  of
 great  interest,  and  those  who  do not  can easily  pass them  by. Or
 I  might  have  omitted  some  passages  of  original  writing  where it
 is  not very  distinctively different  from the  published work;  but it
 has   been   my   intention   throughout   this   'History'   that   the
 author's own voice should be largely heard.                            
   The  way  in  which  The   Return  of   the  Shadow   was  constructed
 has  meant  that  the  first  part  of  The  Treason  of  Isengard  must
 deal   at   some   length   with  further   developments  in   The  Fel-
 lowship  of  the  Ring  up  to  the  point  reached  in the  first book,
 and  this part  is of  necessity a  continuation of  the account  in The
 Return  of  the  Shadow  and  stands  in  very  close  relation to  it -
 though   most  of   the  many   page-references  made   to  it   are  no
 more  than  references  and  need  not   be  looked   up  in   order  to
 follow the discussion.                                                 
   This  book  is  again  very  largely  descriptive  in  intent;  and in
 general  I  have  thought  it  more  useful  to  explain  why  I believe
 the  narrative  to  have evolved  as I  describe it  than to  enlarge on
 my own views of the significance of particular features.               
   As  the  writing  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  proceeds  the initial
 draftings  become   more   and   more   difficult   to  read;   but  for
 obvious  reasons  I  have  not  hesitated  to  try  to present  even the
 most  formidable  examples,   such  as   the  original   description  of
 Frodo's  vision  on  Amon  Hen  (pp.  372  -   3),  though   the  result
 must be peppered all over with dots and queries.                       
   In  the  preparation  of  this   book  I   have  again   been  greatly
 indebted   to   the   help   of   Mr   Taum   Santoski   generously  and
 unfailingly  given,  and  to  that  of  Mr  John  D.  Rateliff  who  has

                                                 
                                                                    
 assisted  in  the  analysis  of  manuscripts  in  the  possession of
 Marquette  University.  I  thank  also  Mr  Charles  B.  Elston, the
 Archivist  of  the  Memorial  Library  at  Marquette,  for providing
 photographs  of  the  designs  on  the  West Gate  of Moria  and the
 inscription  on  Balin's  Tomb,  and  Miss  Tracy  Muench,  who  has
 been responsible for the photocopying of many manuscripts.          
  Mr   Charles  Noad   very  kindly   undertook  an   additional  and
 independent  reading  of  the  proofs,  together  with  a meticulous
 checking  of  all  references  and  citations from  published works.
 In  this connection  I must  explain, what  I should  have explained
 in  The  Return  of   the  Shadow,   a  perhaps   rather  misleading
 device  that  I  have  employed  in  these  books: when  relating an
 earlier  text  to  the  published  form  I  often treat  passages as
 identical  although  the  wording  actually  differs  in unimportant
 ways.  Thus  for  example  (p.  370)  'Sam broke  in on  the discus-
 sion...  with  "Begging  your  pardons,  but   I  don't   think  you
 understand  Mr  Frodo  at  all  (FR  p. 419)  is not  a misquotation
 of   The   Fellowship   of   the  Ring   (which  has   Begging  your
 pardon,"  said  Sam.  "I  don't  think you  understand my  master at
 all"'), but a 'shorthand' by which I indicate  the precise  point in
 The  Fellowship of  the Ring  but also  cite accurately  the reading
 of the earlier text. I do this also  when relating  successive early
 versions to each other.                                             
  The  illustration  of  Orthanc  in  the  Ring  of  Isengard  repro-
 duced as the frontispiece is the earliest of  successive conceptions
 of  the  tower,  and  may be  taken to  represent my  father's image
 of it at the time when the texts in this book  were written.  It was
 done  on  the  back  of  an  examination  script  in  1942,  and was
 found,  together  with  other  drawings,  among the  original drafts
 of  'The  Road  to  Isengard'.  The  evolution  of  Orthanc  will be
 described  in  Volume  VIII,  but  it  seemed  suitable to  use this
 picture as the frontispiece to The Treason of Isengard.             
                                                                    
  As  in  The  Return  of  the  Shadow,  when  citing texts  I follow
 my  father's  representation  of  names,  which  was  very inconsis-
 tent, especially in  the use  of capital  letters. I  abbreviate The
 Fellowship  of  the  Ring as  FR, The  Two Towers  as TT,  and The
 Lord of the Rings  as LR;  and I  refer to  the previous  volumes in
 this 'History', listed on the title-page, as (e.g.) 'II.189, V.226'.
                                                                    
  I take this opportunity to explain an error in The Return of       
 the Shadow (not present in the first American printing). After      
 correction of the second proofs, lines 11 -  12 on  page 32  of that

                                  
                                                                 
 book came to be repeated in lines 15 - 16 in place of  the correct
 text, which should read:                                         
                                                                 
    Bingo's last words, 'I am leaving after dinner', were         
  corrected on the manuscript to 'I am leaving now.'              
