                                     I.                                    
                              GANDALF'S DELAY.                             
                                                                          
 In  The  Return of  the Shadow,  after citing  and discussing  the remark-
 able  notes  and  plot-outlines  bearing  the  date  August  1939 (Chapter
 XXII:  'New  Uncertainties  and  New  Projections'),   I  turned   to  the
 continuation of the story at Rivendell and after, as far as Moria.  But at
 this  time  (towards  the  end  of  1939)  my father  was also  engaged in
 substantial  further  revision  to what  ultimately became  Book I  of The
 Fellowship of the Ring  (FR), arising  primarily from  a changed  story of
 Gandalf's movements,  and an  explanation of  his delay.  I doubt  that it
 would  be  possible  to deduce  a perfectly  clear and  coherent, step-by-
 step chronology of this period in  the narrative  evolution, or  to relate
 precisely  the  development  of  the  early chapters  of what  became Book
 II  to  the  new  work  on Book  I; for  my father  moved back  and forth,
 trying  out  new  conceptions  and  then  perhaps  abandoning   them,  and
 producing  such  a  tangle  of  change  as  cannot  always be  untied: and
 even if it  could be,  it would  require a  vast amount  of space  to make
 it  all   remotely  comprehensible   without  the   manuscripts.  However,
 granting  that  many  uncertainties  remain,  I  do  not  think  that they
 constitute  a  real  impediment  to understanding  the development  in all
 essentials.                                                               
  Most  of  this  new  work  on  the  story  as  far  as  Rivendell  can be
 treated  in  terms  of  the  individual   chapters,  but   some  outlines,
 time-schemes,  and  notes  are  best collected  together, though  I cannot
 certainly  determine  the order  in which  they were  set down.  These are
 the subject of this chapter.                                              
                                                                          
(1). This slip of paper begins 'State of  Plot assumed  after XI.  (Much of
 explanation  in  XII  and  of  incident in  Bree chapter  will have  to be
 rewritten.)'  The  reference  is clearly  to Chapter  XII 'The  Council of
 Elrond',  which  at this  stage included  the narrative  afterwards separ-
 ated off as 'Many Meetings' (see VI.399-400). Then follows:               
                                                                          
    Bilbo  gives  Party  and  goes  off.  At  that  time  he does  not know
  anything about  the ring's  powers or  origin (other  than invisibility).
  Motive  writing  book  (bring  in  his   wry  expression   about  'living
  happily to end of [his] days') - and a restlessness: desire to see either
  Sea  or  Mountains  while  his  days  last.  Confesses  to  a  slight re-
  luctance  to  leave  the  ring,  mixed  with  an oddly  opposite feeling.
  Says to Gandalf he sometimes feels it is  like an  eye looking  at [him].

    These  two  things  give  Gandalf  food  for  thought.  He  helps  Bilbo
 therefore with his preparations - but keeps an eye on the Ring.            
    (Cut out a  lot of  the genealogical  stuff and  most of  the Sackville-
 Baggins stuff.)                                                            
    Then  Gandalf goes  off and  is absent  for 3  and 7  years. At  the end
 of  the  last  absence  (14  -  15   years  after   Bilbo's  disappearance)
 Gandalf  returns  and  actually   stays  with   Frodo.  Then   he  explains
 what  he  has  discovered.  But he  does not  advise Frodo  yet to  go off,
 though   he   does   mention   the   Cracks   of   Doom   and   the   Fiery
 Mountain.                                                                  
    He  departs  again;  and  Frodo  becomes   restless.  As   Gandalf  does
 not  come  back  for  a  year  and  more  Frodo  forms  the  idea  of going
 perhaps  to  the  Cracks  of  Doom,  but  at any  rate to  Rivendell. There
 he  will get  advice. He  finally makes  his plans  with his  friends Merry
 and  [Folco  >]  Faramond'  (no  Odo)  and  Sam.  They go  off just  as the
 Black Riders come to Hobbiton.                                             
    Gandalf  finds  out  about  the  Black  Riders  but is  delayed, because
 the  Dark  Lord  is  hunting  him   (or  because   of  Treebeard).   He  is
 alarmed   at   finding   Frodo   gone   and   immediately   rides   off  to
 Buckland,  but  is  again  too  late.  He  loses their  trail owing  to the
 Old  Forest  escapade,  and  actually   gets  ahead.   He  falls   in  with
 Trotter. Who is Trotter?                                                   
                                                                           
 At  the  end  of  this  sketch  my  father  for  a  moment  contemplated an
 entirely novel answer to this question: that Trotter  was 'a  disguised elf
 - friend of Bilbo's in Rivendell.' He was one of  the Rivendell  scouts, of
 whom  many  were  sent  out, and  he 'pretends  to be  a ranger'.  This was
 struck out, probably as soon as written.                                   
 If  this  is  compared  with  the note  dated August  1939 given  in VI.374
 it will be seen that a passage in the latter bears a distinct similarity to
 what is said here:                                                         
                                                                           
 Gandalf  does  not  tell  Frodo  to leave  Shire ...  The plan  for leaving
 was  entirely  Frodo's.  Dreams  or  some  other  cause  [added:  restless-
 ness]  have  made  him  decide  to  go  journeying   (to  find   Cracks  of
 Doom?   after  seeking   counsel  of   Elrond).  Gandalf   simply  vanishes
 for  years....  Gandalf  is  simply  trying  to  find  them,  and  is  des-
 perately upset when he discovers Frodo has left Hobbiton.                  
                                                                           
 That  Treebeard  was  a  hostile  being,  and  that  he  held   Gandalf  in
 captivity during the crucial time,  appeared in  the 'third  phase' Chapter
 XII (VI.363); cf. also VI.384, 397.                                        
                                                                           
 (2) In another undated scrap is seen the actual emergence of               
 'Trotter's' true name - as a Man: Aragorn.                                 
                                                                           
      Trotter is a man of Elrond's race descendant of [struck out at once:
           Turin] the ancient men of the North, and one of Elrond's house-

  hold.  He  was  a  hunter  and  wanderer.  He became  a friend  of Bilbo.
  He  knew  Gandalf.  He  was  intrigued  by   Bilbo's  story,   and  found
  Gollum.  When  Gandalf  went  off  on  the last  perilous quest  - really
  to  find  out  about  Black  Riders  and  whether  the  Dark  Lord  would
  attack  the  Shire  -  he  [>  Gandalf and  Bilbo] arranged  with Trotter
  (real name  [other unfinished  names struck  oat in  the act  of writing:
  Bara  /  Rho  /  Dam]  Aragorn  son of  Aramir) to  go towards  the Shire
  and  keep  a  lookout  on  the   road  from   East  (Gandalf   was  going
  South). He gives  Aragorn a  letter to  Frodo. Aragorn  pretends he  is a
  Ranger and hangs about Bree. (He also warns Tom Bombadil.)              
      Reason of wooden  shoes -  no need  in this  case because  Aragorn is
  a  man.  Hence  there  is  no  need  for  Gandalf...  The  cache  of food
  at  Weathertop  is  Aragorn's.  Aragorn  steers them  to Weathertop  as a
  good lookout.                                                           
      But how could Trotter miss Gandalf?                                 
      What delayed Gandalf? Black Riders or other hunters. Treebeard.     
      Aragorn  did  not  miss  Gandalf  and  arranged tryst  on Weathertop.
                                                                         
         At the end is written very emphatically and twice underlined: NO
 0 D O.                                                                   
  The  likeness  of  what is  said of  Trotter/Aragorn here  (he was  a man
 of Elrond's race  and household,  he became  a friend  of Bilbo's,  and he
 'pretends he is a Ranger') to the proposal at the end  of $1  (Trotter was
 'a disguised elf', one of  the Rivendell  scouts, a  friend of  Bilbo's in
 Rivendell, and he  'pretends to  be a  ranger') may  suggest that  the one
 arose directly from  the other.  On the  other hand,  my father  had still
 not finally decided  the question;  for on  the reverse  of this  piece of
 paper and undoubtedly at the same time he wrote:                         
                                                                         
  Alternative function for Trotter. Trotter is  Peregrin Boffin  that Bilbo
  took  away  with  him  or  who  ran  off  with  Bilbo  - but  this rather
  duplicates things - unless you cut out all Frodo's friends.             
      If  Trotter is  Peregrin Boffin then  Bilbo must  go off  quietly and
  Peregrin simply vanish about the same time.                             
                                                                         
 This  is  followed  by  a  brief  passage sketching  a rough  narrative on
 these lines:                                                             
                                                                         
  There  was  peace  in  Hobbiton  for  many  years.  Gandalf  came  seldom
  and  then  very  quietly and  mainly to  visit Bilbo.  He seemed  to have
  given  up  trying  to  persuade  even  [?young]  Tooks to  go off  on mad
  adventures  out  of  the  Shire.  Then suddenly  things began  to happen.
  Bilbo  Baggins  disappeared  again  -  that  is  hardly exact:  he walked
  off  without  saying  a  word  except  to  Gandalf  (and  to  his nephews
  Peregrin  and  Frodo,  it  may  be  supposed).  It  was  a great  blow to
  Frodo.  He  found  Bilbo  had  left  everything  he possessed  to himself
  and  Peregrin. But  Peregrin also  disappeared, leaving  a will  in which
  his share                                                               

                                            
                                                                           
     Here these notes end, the idea abandoned. Perhaps it was here that     
 Trotter ceased finally to be a hobbit, Peregrin Boffin.                    
                                                                           
 (3) A page of clear  notes in  ink, agreeing  in part  with features  of $1
 and $2,  is headed  optimistically Final decisions. Oct.  8 1939.  This was
 subsequently emended in pencil, but I give it first as it was written.     
                                                                           
  (1)  General plot  as at  present. Bilbo  vanishes at  party (but  all that
  chapter  will  have  to  be   reduced,  especially   the  Sackville-Baggins
  business). (Begin with a conversation between Bilbo and Frodo?)           
  (2)  Gandalf  not  expected  by  Frodo.  Gandalf  had  not  been  seen  for
  213  years.  Frodo  grew  restless  and  went  off  - although  Gandalf had
  really not wished him to go till he returned.                             
  (3)  When  Bilbo  went  Gandalf  not  sure  of  nature  of   Ring.  Bilbo's
  longevity  had  made  him  suspicious  -  and  he  induced  Bilbo   not  to
  take  Ring  with  him.  Bilbo  had  no  idea  that  Ring  was  dangerous  -
  hence  simplify  all  Bilbo's  motives,  and remove  the difficulty  of his
  burdening Frodo with it.                                                  
  (4)   Frodo's  friends   are  Meriadoc   Brandybuck  and   Peregrin  Boffin
  called   Merry  and   Perry  (only;   no  Odo).   Peregrin  drops   off  at
  Crickhollow. Merry at Rivendell. Sam only goes on to end.                 
  (5) Trotter is not  a hobbit  but a  real ranger  who had  gone to  live in
  Rivendell after much wandering. Cut out shoes.                            
                                                                           
 In (4) it is seen that despite the decision - which was indeed final - that
 Trotter was a Man, 'Peregrin Boffin' survived  the loss  of his  alter ego,
 remaining  an  intimate  of the  owner of  Bag End  in a  later generation;
 and  for  a  brief  moment  may  be  said  to  step into  the shoes  of Odo
 Bolger - since he 'drops off at Crickhollow'.                              
  Pencilled  emendations  were  made  to  (4)  and  (5).  To  (4)  was first
 added:  'Peregrin stays  at Hobbiton  and tells  Gandalf.' This  was struck
 out,  and the  first sentence  of the  note was  changed to  read: 'Frodo's
 friends  are  Meriadoc  Brandybuck  and  Ham   [ilcar]  Bolger   and  Fara-
 mond  Took,  called  Merry,  Ham,  and  Far',  with  the  further addition:
 'Ham  drops  off  at Crickhollow,  but is  picked up  by Gandalf  and used
 as a decoy.?' (On  this see  under $6 below,  p. 13.)  Thus once  more 'Odo
 Bolger'  will  bounce  back, but  now under  the name  of Hamilcar  of that
 ilk.  'Hamilcar'  has  appeared  hitherto  only  in  a  note  dated  August
 1939,  where  it  is  proposed  that  'Odo'  be  changed  to  'Hamilcar' or
 'Fredegar'  (VI.373).  'Peregrin  Boffin'  disappears  again  -   but  only
 temporarily.                                                               
  To  (5)  was  added  in  pencil,  after  'a  real ranger':  'descendant of
 Elendil.  Tarkil.'  The  name Tarkil  appears in  the Etymologies  in V.364
 (stem  KHIL  'follow'): * tara-khil,  in  which  the  second  element  evi-
 dently  bears  the  sense  mortal  man  (Hildi  the  Followers,  an  Elvish
 name for Men, V.245).                                                      
                                                                           
 (4)  A  page  of  very  rough  notes in  pencil, covered  with emendations

 and  additions,  is  dated  'Autumn  1939*  and  headed New  Plot. There
 now enters a  very important  development: a  far more  explicit account
 of what had  caused Gandalf  s delay  than anything  that has  been said
 hitherto; and the  evil figure  of 'Giant  Treebeard', his  captor, dis-
 appears - though not for good (see p. 72).                               
                                                                         
   Time Scheme won't work out for Gandalf to be ahead.                    
   (1)  Crickhollow  scene  -   only  Hamilcar   [struck  out:   or  Folco](9)
   there.  He  blows  horn  and  startles the  Riders' horses,  which bolt.
   They  run  out  of  the  house,  and  find a way (10) as the hue  and cry
   wakes.                                                                 
   (2)  Gandalf  is   behind  at   Bree.  He   knows  Trotter   (real  name
   Aragorn).  Trotter  helped  him  track  Gollum.  He brings  Trotter back
   in  April  1418  to  keep  watch  especially  S.E.  of  Shire. It  was a
   message  of  Trotter's  in  July (?)  that took  Gandalf away (11)-fearing
   Black  Riders.  He  meets Trotter  at Sarn Ford.(11) He  then tells  him of
   Frodo's  intended  departure  on  Sept.  22.  Begs  him  to  watch  East
   Road in  case anything  happens to  Gandalf himself.  He visits  Bree on
   way back to Shire on Sept. [date  illegible]. But  is pursued  and tries
   to get round to west of Shire.                                         
    Black  Riders  pursue  them  [read  him]  -  Gandalf  has  insufficient
   magic  to  cope  with  Black  Riders  unaided, whose  king is  a wizard.
   They  pursue  him  over  Sarn Ford  and  he  cannot  (or  dare  not)  go
   back to Shire.                                                         
    Eventually  he  is  besieged  in  the  Western  Tower.  He  cannot  get
   away  while  they  guard  it  with  five Riders.  But when  Black Riders
   have  located  Frodo  and  found that  he has  gone off  without Gandalf
   they  ride  away.  Three  are ahead.  Three follow  Frodo, but  miss him
   and  get  ahead at  Bree. Three  come behind.(13) Gandalf follows  after -
   meets Peregrin [written above: news from Gaffer].                     
                                                                         
 The  remainder  of  this  outline  is  a  very  rough and  much corrected
 chronology  of  Gandalf's  subsequent  movements,  which  is   best  con-
 sidered together with other chronologies of this time ($6).              
   A remarkable feature of this  'New Plot'  is the  date April  1418, for
 this  is  the  first  appearance of  any 'exterior'  chronology; moreover
 1418  is  the  year  in  LR,  Appendix  B  -   according  to   the  Shire
 Reckoning, i.e. 3018 of the Third Age. At the present time, at  any rate,
 I am unable to cast  any light  on the  chronology underlying  this date,
 or to make any suggestion as to the process by which it had arisen.      
                                                                         
 (5) On the reverse of the page  bearing this  'New Plot'  is a  series of
 notes on unconnected topics.                                             
                                                                         
   (1)  Some  mention  of  Bill   Ferney's  pony.   Does  this   remain  at
   Rivendell? [The question is answered 'Yes'.]                           
   (2)  Real  name  of  Trotter?  [Pencilled  against this:  'Aragorn'. See
                                                                         
         $$ 2,4.)                                                         

                                         
                                                                         
  (3) Elrond should tell more of Gilgalad?
  (4) New name of Dimrilldale (now transferred to South). River
      Hoarwell flowing out of ? Hoardale. Nen fimred. Wolfdale
      [written above: Entishdale]. The region west of the Misty
      Mountains north of Rivendell is called the Entishlands - home
      of Trolls.(14)
  (5) Gandalf says Tom Bombadil never leaves his own ground.
      How then known to Butterbur? Tom's boundaries are from
      Bree to High Hay?(15) [Against the words 'How then known to
      Butterbur?' my father pencilled 'Not'.]
  (6) Trotter is a Ranger - descendant of Elendil? - he is known to
      Bilbo, and Gandalf. He has previously been to Mordor and
      been tormented (caught in Moria). Gandalf brought him back
      towards borders of Shire in April. It was a message from
      Trotter that fetched Gandalf away in summer before Frodo left.
  (7) Note Frodo's red sword is broken. Hence he accepts Sting.'
 A final note was added in pencil: '(8) Not Barnabas Butterbur.' - In
 the remarks about Trotter here the only point that has not appeared in
 notes already given is that Trotter was captured in Moria: cf. the
 original story of the Council of Elrond (VI.401): 'Trotter had tracked
 Gollum as he wandered southwards, through Fangorn Forest, and
 past the Dead Marshes, until he had himself been caught and
 imprisoned by the Dark Lord.' It is seen here that the story of Trotter's
 capture and torturing survived his change from hobbit to man.
   Since Trotter's real name is not yet known these notes evidently
 preceded those in $2 and $4; but no doubt they all come from the
 same time.
                                                                         
 (6)  Time-schemes. In  this section  I attempt  to present  four chronolo-
 gies  of  Gandalf's  movements,  which  I  label  A,  B,  C,  D. A  is the
 conclusion  of the  'New Plot'  given in  $4 above,  and was  probably the
 first  to  be  set  down.  The  schemes  vary  among themselves,  each one
 giving slightly different chronologies; and it is hard to be sure  to what
 extent the story differed in each, since my father  was more  explicit and
 less  explicit at  different points  in the  different schemes.  They were
 working  chronologies,  much  confused  by  alternatives   and  additions,
 and they cannot be usefully  reproduced as  they stand,  but in  the table
 on  p.  12  I  set  out  comparatively  the  (final)  dates in  each, with
 statements in the original wording or closely  based on  it. The  dates of
 Frodo's   journey   from   Hobbiton   to   Weathertop  remain   of  course
 unchanged, but I repeat them here for convenience:                       
                                                                         
  Thurs. Sept. 22. Frodo's party                                           
  Fri.         23. Frodo and his friends leave Hobbiton                            
  Sat.         24. Night with the Elves                                  
  Sun.         25. Farmer Maggot; reach Crickhollow                      
  Mon.         26. Old Forest; first night with Bombadil                           

 Tues.    27. Second night with Bombadil.                                     
 Wed.     28. Leave Bombadil; Barrow-downs.                                    
 Thurs.   29. Reach Bree.                                                    
 Fri.     30. Leave Bree; in Chetwood.                                         
 Sat. Oct. 1. In Chetwood.                                                 
 Sun.      2. In the Midgewater Marshes.                                        
 Mon.      3. Second day in the Marshes.                                        
 Tues.     4. Camp by stream under alders.                                     
 Wed.      5. Camp at feet of the hills.                                        
 Thurs.    6. Reach Weathertop; attack at night.                              
 Notes on the Time-schemes (table on p. 12).                             
                                                                        
 The  relative  chronology  of  Gandalf's  movements  is  much   the  same
 in all four, though the actual  dates differ;  but in  C he  takes longer
 from Hobbiton to Crickhollow,  and in  D he  takes a  day less  from Bree
 to  Weathertop.  In  A  and  B  the  date  of Gandalf  s escape  from the
 Tower  was first  given as  24 September,  the night  that Frodo  and his
 companions passed with the  Elves in  the Woody  End, and  in B  there is
 a suggestion,  struck out,  that Frodo  'dreamt his  dream at  night with
 the Elves'; as is seen from the other schemes, he  dreamed of  Gandalf in
 the  Western  Tower.  In  C it  is said  that Frodo  dreamt of  the Tower
 when  'with  the  Elves  near  Woodhall',  but  against  this  my  father
 wrote:  'No -  at Crickhollow';  he also  noted here  that the  attack on
 Crickhollow  should  be  told  on   the  night   of  The   Prancing  Pony
 (whence  the  'doubled'  opening  of  FR  Chapter  11,  'A  Knife  in the
 Dark'). In D  the placing  of Frodo's  'vision of  Gandalf' or  'Dream of
 the  Tower'  hesitates between  the night  he spent  with the  Elves, the
 night at  Crickhollow, and  the first  night at  Bombadil's house.  - For
 the remarkable history of the dream see pp. 33-6.                       
 The  mention  in  A  and  B  of  Gandalf's meeting  with  Peregrin Boffin
 (Perry) at Hobbiton after his escape  belongs with  the addition  made to
 the 'final decisions' given in $3 above: 'Peregrin stays at  Hobbiton and
 tells Gandalf.' This was a short-lived idea - indeed already in  the 'New
 Plot' ($4) my father scribbled in  here 'news  from Gaffer':  a reference
 to the story that will appear in the next phase of  work on  'The Council
 of Elrond' (p. 135; FR p. 276).                                         
 Scheme  A  makes  no  mention  of  what  happened  at   Crickhollow,  but
 the  'New  Plot' that  precedes it  begins with  the statement  that only
 Hamilcar  Bolger  was there,  and that  the horses  of the  Riders bolted
 when  he  blew  a  horn:  which  presumably  means  that the  attack took
 place  before  Gandalf  arrived.  An  addition  to  B  (contradicting the
 chronology of that scheme) says that                                    
                                                                        
 The  Black  Riders  creep  into  Buckland,  but  too  late  to  see Frodo
 depart.  They  track   him  to   Crickhollow  and   guard  it,   and  see
 Gandalf  enter.  But  Gandalf  (and  Ham  pretending  to be  Frodo) burst
 out on night of Sept. 29.                                               

 Journeys of Gandalf.                    
                                  A      
 Sun.                 Escapes from Tower.
 Sept. 25.                               
                                        
 Tues.                                   
 Sept. 27                                
 Wed.                 Reaches Hobbiton; sees.             
 Sept. 28             Perry Boffin.                   
 Thurs.               Crickhollow.                      
                                       
 Sept. 29                                
                                        
 Fri.              Leaves Crickhollow,
 Sept. 30          goes to Bombadil.      
                                        
 Sat.              Leaves Bombadil;      
 Oct. 1            reaches Bree.          
 Sun.              Leaves Bree in morning.
 Oct. 2                                  
 Mon.                                    
 Oct. 3                                  
                                        
 Tues.             Breaks through Riders.
 Oct. 4            and reaches.           
                   Weathertop.            

             B.               
                            
 Escapes from Tower at       
 dawn.                        
                            
 Reaches  Hobbiton;  sees
 Perry  Boffin  (morning).
                            
 Reaches Crickhollow         
 late.                        
                            
 Leaves Crickhollow          
 early, goes to Bombadil.     
                            
 Leaves          Bombadil,
 reaches Bree  late, 'very
 tired'.                      
                            
 Leaves Bree early.           
                            
 Reaches Weathertop          
 late.                        
                            
 Pursued by Riders           
 leaves Weathertop early.     

             C.           
                        
 Leaves White Tower at
 dawn.                    
                        
 Reaches Hobbiton.        
                        
 Reaches     Crickhollow
 via Bridge, evening.
 Riders attack  at night.
                        
 Dawn: breaks out with
 Ham  and  'rides  off' to
 Bombadil.                
 Reaches Bree in evening.
                        
 Leaves Bree.             
                        
 Reaches   Weathertop   in
 evening.   Leaves  during
 night.                   

              D.        
                      
 Returns to Shire.      
                      
 Riders attack         
 Crickhollow; carry off
 Ham, pursued by       
 Gandalf (midnight).
 Early  morning:  rescues
 Ham,  goes  to  Bombadil.
                      
 Leaves  Bombadil  early,
 reaches Bree.          
                      
 Leaves Bree with Ham
 early.                 
                      
 Reaches Weathertop in
 evening. Holds out
 during night.          
                      
 Flies from Weathertop
 pursued by Riders.     

               
                                                                        
 With this d. the addition to $3  above: 'Ham  drops off  at Crickhollow,
 but is picked up by Gandalf and used as a decoy.' Scheme C says  that it
 was at dawn on  the 30th  (the morning  on which  the hobbits  left Bree
 with Trotter after the attack on the inn) that  'Gandalf broke  out with
 Ham'; he then 'rode off to Tom' (which way did he go?).                 
  A different story is seen in D, in which it is told that at midnight on
 the  29th/30th  Black  Riders  crossed  the  Brandywine  by  the  Ferry,
 attacked  the house  at Crickhollow,  and carried  off Ham,  'pursued by
 Gandalf'; and  that in  the early  morning of  the 30th  Gandalf rescued
 Ham, the Black Riders fled  in terror  to their  King, and  Gandalf went
 on to visit Tom.                                                        
  For  narrative  drafts  reflecting  these  versions  of  the  events at
 Crickhollow see pp. 53-6, 68-70.                                        
  All  the  schemes  agree  that  Gandalf  went  from  Buckland  to visit
 Tom  Bombadil;  cf.  the original  version of  'The Council  of Elrond',
 VI.401,  where  Gandalf says  that 'when  I had  chased the  Riders from
 Crickhollow I turned back to visit him.'                                
  Scheme D has a note  that 'Trotter  reaches the  Shire border  Sept. 14
 and hears ill  news on  morning of  25th from  Elves.' This  scheme also
 provides  an  account  of the  movements of  the individual  Riders, who
 are identified by the letters A to r. It was n who  came to  Hobbiton on
 23 September, the night on  which Frodo  left, and  it was  n and  z who
 trailed the hobbits in the Shire, while G H I were on the East  Road and
 was  to  the  southward.  On  the  25th,  the  day  that  Frodo  reached
 Crickhollow,  DEGHI  assembled  at  the  Brandywine  Bridge;   c  waited
 there while  H and  I passed  through Bree  on Monday  the 26th.  On the
 27th n and E 'got into  Buckland and  looked for  Baggins'; on  the 28th
 they 'located' him and went to get the help of  c. On  the night  of the
 29th DEG crossed the River by the Ferry; and  on the  same night  H and
 1  returned  and  attacked The  Prancing Pony.  Pursued by  Gandalf from
 Crickhollow   DEG   fled  to   the  King.   ABCDEFG  'rode   East  after
 Gandalf  and  the  supposed Baggins'  on 1  October; F  and c  were sent
 direct to Weathertop, and the other five,  together with  H and  I, rode
 through  Bree  at  night,  throwing  down  the gates,  and from  the inn
 (where Gandalf was) the noise of their  passage was  heard like  a wind.
 F  and  G  reached  Weathertop  on  the 2nd;  Gandalf was  pursued North
 from Weathertop by C D E, while A B F G H I patrolled the East Road.
                                                                        
  Of  these four  time-schemes only  D treats  fully the  chronology from
 Weathertop  to  the  Ford.  A  mentions  that  Gandalf  went  North 'via
 Entish  Lands'  and  reached  Rivendell  on   14  October;   two  Riders
 pursued him  'towards Entish  Dale; these  are they  that came  from the
 flank at the Ford. ' B  also has  Gandalf reach  Rivendell on  the 14th,
 and says:                                                               
                                                                        
  But messages from the Elves of  the Shire  have travelled  swiftly since
  Sept.  24.  Already  Elrond  has heard  in Rivendell  that the  Ring had

 set  out  alone,  and  that  Gandalf  is  missing,  and  the  Ringwraiths are
 out.  He  sends  out  scouts  North,  South,  and  West.  These   scouts  are
 Elves   of  power.   Glorfindel  goes   along  the   Road.  He   reaches  the
 Bridge  of Mitheithel (18) at dawn  on  Oct.  12  and  drives  off  the  Black
 Riders  and  pursues  them  West  till  they  escape.  On  Oct.  14  he turns
 and  searches  for  traces  of Frodo*s  party for  several days  (2/3), finds
 them,  and  then  comes  after  them,  catching  them   up  on   the  evening
 of Oct. 18.                                                                  
                                                                             
 In  Scheme  D  the  final  chronology for  this part  of the  story, agreeing
 (except  in  one  point)  with  that  in  LR  Appendix  B though  fuller, was
 attained. For earlier phases of the development see VI.219, 360.             
                                                                             
 October.                                                                     
 Wed. 5.    Camp near hills.                                                
 Thurs.6.   Attack on camp at Weathertop.                                   
 Fri. 7.    Frodo leaves Weathertop.                                        
 Sat. 8.                                         News reaches Elrond.         
 Sun. 9.                                         Glorfindel leaves Rivendell.
 Mon. 10.   Frodo in the Cheerless Lands.                                   
 Tues. 11.                                      Gandalf at Hoarwell          
                                                 (Mitheithel).                
                                                 Rain. Glorfindel at Bridge
                                                 of Mitheithel.               
                                                                             
 Wed. 12.     Frodo and Trotter see Road and rivers.                          
 Thurs. 13.   Frodo crosses Last Bridge.                                      
 Fri. 14.     Frodo in hills.                    Glorfindel finds tracks.     
 Sat. 15.     Hills (wet).                                                    
 Sun. 16.     Hills (shelf) [See FR p. 214:'a stony shelf'].                  
 Mon. 17.     Troll-ridge.                                                    
 Tues.  18.   Trolls.                                  Gandalf and Ham reach.
                                                                             
                                                 Rivendell                    
                                                 Glorfindel finds Trotter etc.
                                                                             
 Wed. 19.     Bend [See FR p. 224: 'the Road bent right'].                    
 Thurs. 20.   Battle at Ford of Bruinen (19)                                  
 Fri. 21.                                                                     
 Sat. 22.     Frodo unconscious.                                              
 Sun. 23.                                                                     
 Mon. 24.     Frodo wakes.                                                    
 Tues.  25.                                                                   
 Wed. 26.     Council of Elrond.                                              
                                                                             
 The  only  point in  which this  differs from  the final  chronology is  that a
 whole  day  passes  between  Frodo's   waking  and   the  Council   of  Elrond,
 which  thus  takes  place  here  on  the  26th  of  October,  not on  the 25th.

 But this is not a slip, for the same appears in other closely related      
 chronologies of this period.                                               
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                  
                                                                           
  1.   Faramond  Took  replaced  Folco  Took  in  the  original  version  of
       'The Council of Elrond', VI.406 and subsequently.                     
  2.   Turin of course had  no descendants.  Possibly Turin  was a  slip for
       Tuor, grandfather of Elrond.                                         
  3.   That  it  was  Trotter  who  found  Gollum  appears  in  the original
       version of 'The Council of Elrond' (VI.401 and note 20).             
  4.   The  meaning of  this very  elliptical remark  is possibly  that when
       Trotter  was  a  hobbit the  injury to  his feet  caused him  to wear
       shoes, which for a hobbit was  highly unusual;  but if  he was  a man
       that would not be the case.                                          
  5.   From  its appearance  the illegible  word could  well be  otiose, but
       that does not  seem likely.  If however  this is  what it  is, 'Hence
       there is no need for' must be a sentence left in the air, followed by
       'Gandalf  otiose'  -  i.e.  Gandalf  need  have  nothing  to  do with
       Weathertop:  Aragorn   'steered  them   to  Weathertop'   simply  be-
       cause  it  was  'a  good  lookout'.  But  the  whole passage  is very
       obscure.                                                             
  6.   I.e.,  if  Bilbo  went  off  with  Peregrin Boffin  there would  be a
       duplication  when   Frodo  in   his  turn   went  off   with  younger
       companions.                                                          
  7.   Cf.  the story  of Peregrin  Boffin in  VI.385-6: there  Peregrin and
       Frodo stood  in the  same relationship  (first cousins  once removed)
       to Bilbo.                                                            
  8.   The  bracketed  sentence  was  struck  out,   with  the   note:  'No,
       because  that  would  give  away  suspense.'  On  the  same  piece of
       paper  as  these  'final  decisions'  there  is  a  sketch of  such a
       conversation, although in this there is no suggestion of a party:
           'I am going for a holiday, a long  holiday!' said  Bilbo Baggins
       to   his  young   'nephew'  Frodo.   'What  is   more,  I   am  going
       tomorrow.  It  will  be  April  30th,  my  anniversary  and   a  good
       day to start on. Also the weather is fine! '                         
           Bilbo   had   made   this   announcement   a  great   many  times
       before;  but each  time he  made it,  and it  became plainer  that he
       really  meant  it,  Frodo's  heart  sank  lower.  He  had  lived with
       Bilbo  for  nearly  12  years  and  known  him  longer,  and  he  was
       devoted  to  him.  'Where  are  you  going?'  he  asked,  but  he did
       not  expect  any answer,  as he  had also  asked this  question often
       before and got no satisfactory reply.                                
           'I would tell you if I  knew myself  for certain  - or  perhaps I
       would,'  answered  Bilbo  as  usual.  'To  the  Sea  maybe,   or  the

      Mountains.  Mountains,  I  think;  yes,  Mountains,'  he  said,  as if
      to himself.                                                           
           'Could  I  come  with  you?'  asked  Frodo.  He  had  never  said
      that  before;  and  he  had  not  really any  desire to  leave Bag-End
      or the  Shire that  he loved;  but that  night with  Bilbo's departure
      so near                                                               
      Here                this                 fragment                ends.
 9.   or Folco: cf.  $3 (4):  'peregrin [Boffin]  drops off  at Crickhollow.'
 10.  find a way is clear, but my  father possibly  intended ride  away, or
      flee away, or something similar.                                      
 11.  In  the  'third phase'  version Gandalf  still left  Bag End  'one wet
      dark evening in May' (VI.323). In FR  (p. 76)  he left  at the  end of
      June.                                                                 
 12.  The name Sarn Ford is  here met  for the  first time.  It is  found on
      the most original part of the original LR map (pp. 299, 305).         
 13.  The  numbers  were  first  written  two  ahead, four  following Frodo,
      three  behind.  The  passage  was  bracketed  with  a  note:  'No, see
      Black Riders' movements': this is a reference to  the full  account in
      Scheme D (see p. 13).                                                 
 14.  For  the  transference  of  Dimrill-dale  to the  South and  the other
      side  of  the  Misty  Mountains  and its  replacement by  Hoardale see
      VI.432-3,  notes  3  and  13.  The  present  note  is   very  probably
      where  the  River  Hoarwell  (see  VI.192,  360)  rising  in Hoardale,
      and the Entish  Lands, first  emerged. No  doubt it  was at  this time
      that  Hoardale  was  written on  the manuscript  of the  first version
      of  'The  Ring  Goes  South'   (VI.432,  note   3);  but   Entish Dale
      evidently soon replaced it - it is  found in  one of  the Time-schemes
      (p. 13) and was written  in on  the present  note. On  Ent as  used in
      these names, in the sense  of Old  English erst  'giant', the  Ents of
      Fangorn not having yet arisen, see VI.205.                            
 15.  In  the  'third  phase' narrative  Tom Bombadil  was still  thought of
      as visiting The Prancing Pony (VI.334),  but in  the first  version of
      'The  Council  of  Elrond'  (VI.402)  Gandalf  says that  'the mastery
      of  Tom  Bombadil  is  seen  only  on  his  own  ground  -  from which
      he has never stepped within my memory.'                               
 16.  Bilbo's gift to Frodo of Sting is first mentioned in the initial draft
      for 'The Council  of Elrond'  (VI.397), and  Frodo's possession  of it
      in  the  sketch  for  the  Moria  story  (VI.443).  -  Why  is Frodo's
      sword  called  'red'? In  another isolated  note, written  much later,
      this  reappears:   'What  happened   to  the   red  sword[s]   of  the
      Barrows?  In  Frodo's  case  it  is  broken  at  the  Ford and  he has
      Sting.'  In the  'third phase'  version of  'Fog on  the Barrow-downs'
      they  were  'bronze  swords,  short,  leaf-shaped  and  keen' (VI.128,
      329); at some  later time  the reading  of FR  (p. 157),  according to
      which  they  were  'damasked  with  serpent-forms  in  red  and gold',
      was entered on that manuscript.                                       

                                                        
                                                                       
    17 On Entish Dale see note 14. - In the 'third phase' version of the
    story there were six Riders in ambush  at the  Ford (VI.361);  in FR
    there were four (cf. p. 62).                                        
 18. This  is  the  first  appearance in  the texts  of the  Elvish name
    Mitheithel  of  the River  Hoarwell (see  note 14)  and of  the Last
    Bridge,  by  which the  East Road  crossed the  river (but  they are
    found on the sketch-maps redrawn in Vol. VI, p. 201).               
 19. This is  the first  occurrence of  the name  Bruinen, other  than on
    one of the sketch-maps mentioned in note 18.                        

                                      II.                                   
                            THE FOURTH PHASE (1):                           
                            FROM HOBBITON TO BREE.                          
                                                                           
 The  rethinking  and  rewriting  of   this  period   led  to   an  extremely
 complex  situation  in  the  actual  constituent chapter-manuscripts  of the
 book  as  it  stood.  Some  of  the  manuscripts of  the 'third  phase' were
 now  in  their  turn  covered  with  corrections  and deletions  and inters-
 persed with inserted riders, so that  they became  chaotic (cf.  VI.309). In
 this case, however,  since substantial  parts of  those manuscripts  were in
 no need of correction,  or of  very little,  my father  wrote out  fair only
 those  parts  of  the  chapters  that  had been  much affected  by revision,
 and added to these  the unaffected  portions of  the original  'third phase'
 texts.  For  this  'fourth' phase,  therefore, some  of the  manuscripts are
 textually  hybrids,  while  others  remain  common  to  both   'phases'  (no
 doubt a somewhat artificial conception).                                   
  The  rejected  parts  of  the  'third  phase'  manuscripts  were  separated
 and set aside and in a sense 'lost', so that when the 'fourth  phase' series
 was  sent  to  Marquette   University  some   eighteen  years   later  these
 superseded  pages  -  and  a  good  deal  of  preliminary draft  writing for
 their  replacement  - remained  in England.  To put  it all  together again,
 and  to  work  out  the  intricacies   of  the   whole  complex   become  so
 widely  separated,  has been  far from  easy; but  I have  no doubt  that in
 the result the history of these texts has been correctly ascertained.'     
  Where  necessary  to  distinguish  rough  revision  in  draft and  the fair
 copy manuscript based on it I shall call the former 'A'  and the  latter 'B'
 for the purpose of this chapter.                                           
  The revision of this  period came  very near  to attaining  the text  of FR
 Book  I  through  a  great  part of  its length,  though with  certain major
 and  notable  exceptions;  and  in  what  follows  a  host of  minor changes
 is  to  be  presupposed,  since there  would be  little purpose  in spelling
 them  out.  It  is indeed  remarkable to  see that  by the  end of  1939 the
 story  as  far  as  Rivendell  had  been  brought,  after  so many  and such
 meticulous  revisions,  to a  point where  one could  read the  greater part
 of  it  and  scarcely  suspect  any  difference  from  FR   without  careful
 comparison;   yet   at   this  time   my  father   was  without   any  clear
 conception of what lay before him.                                         
  In  my  account  chapter  by  chapter  of  the   'fourth  phase'   I  shall
 concentrate  on  the  major  elements  of  reconstruction  that   belong  to
 this time.                                                                 

                                                                        
                                                                           
                      Chapter I: 'A Long-expected Party'.                   
                                                                           
 The  sixth  or  'third  phase'  version  of  this  chapter  (VI.314-15)  was
 heavily  reworked  in  certain passages,  bringing the  story at  almost all
 points  virtually to  the form  in FR.  The substantial  rider added  at the
 beginning,  introducing  the  story  of  the  youth  of  Peregrin  Boffin or
 Trotter  (see  VI.384-6),  was  rejected  when  the  decision   was  finally
 taken that Trotter was a Man, and does not appear in the fair copy B.      
  Many  changes  reflect  suggestions   in  the   notes  dated   August  1939
 given  in  VI.370  ff.,  and  some new  features derive  from the  notes and
 outlines  given  in Chapter  I of  this book.  Thus Bilbo  took with  him 'a
 bundle  wrapped  in  old  cloths':  his  'elf-armour'  (see  VI.371-2). Now,
 just  as  in  FR  (p.  40),  he  put  the envelope  on the  mantlepiece (but
 suddenly  took it  down and  stuck it  in his  pocket), and  Gandalf entered
 at  that  moment  (changing  the  previous  story,  in  which   Gandalf  met
 Bilbo  at  the  bottom  of the  hill, VI.315).  Their conversation  (for the
 form  of  it  before  this  revision  see VI.238-40)  becomes exactly  as in
 FR, as  far as  'It's time  he was  his own  master now'  (p. 41),  and this
 clearly  derives  from  the  'August  1939' note  given in  VI.374: 'Neither
 Bilbo   nor   Gandalf   must   know   much  about   the  Ring,   when  Bilbo
 departs.  Bilbo's  motive  is  simply  tiredness,  an  unexplained restless-
 ness...'  Bilbo's  words  about   his  book,   which  Gandalf   says  nobody
 will  read,  are  taken  up from  the note  given in  VI.371. But  here this
 'fourth phase' version  shows a  significant difference  from FR:  for there
 is  no  quarrel  between  them as  yet,' though  it hovers  on the  verge of
 being devised (on the first germ of the quarrel see VI.378 - 9). I  give the
 passage  in  the  form  of the  fair copy  B (which  the draft  A approaches
 very closely):                                                             
                                                                           
  'Everything?' said Gandalf. 'The ring as well?'                           
  'Well, or yes I suppose so,' stammered Bilbo.                             
  'Where is it?'                                                            
  'I put it in an envelope for him, and put it on the mantle - well         
 no! Isn't that odd now! Here it is in my pocket!'                          
  Gandalf  looked  again  very  hard   at  Bilbo,   and  his   eyes  glinted.
 'I  think,  Bilbo,'  he said  quietly, 'I  should leave  it with  him. Don't
 you want to?                                                               
  'Well  yes  -  and  yet   it  seems   very  difficult   to  part   with  it
 somehow.   Why   do   you   want  me   to  leave   it  behind?'   he  asked,
 and  a  curious  note   of  suspicion   came  into   his  voice.   'You  are
 always   worrying   about   it   lately,   but   you  have   never  bothered
 me about the other things I got on my journey.'                            
  'Magic   rings   are   -   well,  magic,'   answered  Gandalf;   'and  they
 are   not,   nowadays,   very   common.   Let's  say   that  I   am  profes-
 sionally  interested  in  your  ring,  and  would  like  to  know  where  it

 
 is.  Also  I  think  you  have  had  it  long  enough.  You  won't  want  it
 any more, Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.'                               
   'Oh,  very  well,'  said  Bilbo.  'It  would be  a relief,  in a  way, not
 to  be  bothered  with  it.  It  has   been  rather   growing  on   my  mind
 lately.  Sometimes  I  have  felt  that  it  was  like  an  eye  looking  at
 me;(3) and I am  always  wanting  to   put  it   on  and   disappear,  don't
 you  know,  or  wondering  if  it  is  safe  and  pulling  it  out  to  make
 sure.  I  tried  leaving  it  locked  up,  but  I  found  I   couldn't  rest
 without  it  in   my  pocket.   I  don't   know  why.   Well!  Now   I  must
 be   starting,   or   somebody   else   will   catch   me.   I   have   said
 good-bye,  and  I  couldn't  bear  to  do  it  all  over  again.'  He picked
 up his bag and moved towards the door.                                      
   'You have still got the ring in your pocket,' said the wizard.            
   'So  I  have,  and  my  will  and  all  the  other  documents  too!' cried
 Bilbo.  'I  had  better  give  them  to  you  to  deliver  to   Frodo.  That
 will  be  safest.'  He  held  out  the  envelope,  but  just as  Gandalf was
 about  to  take  it,  Bilbo's  hand  jerked  and  the  envelope fell  on the
 floor.   Quick   as   lightning   the   wizard   stooped   and   seized  it,
 before   Bilbo   could   pick   it  up.   An  odd   look  passed   over  the
 hobbit's  face,  almost  like  anger.  Suddenly  it  gave  way  to   a  look
 of relief and a smile.                                                      
   'Well, that's that!' he said. 'Now I'm off!'                              
                                                                            
   From this  point the  revision brings  the narrative  almost to  the final
 form.  The  dwarves,  now  three  and  no  longer   named,  play   only  the
 same  role  as  in  FR;  and  when  Frodo  returns  to  Bag  End   he  finds
 Gandalf  sitting  in  the  dark,  whereupon  the  conversation  between them
 in  FR  (pp.  44-5)   follows.  A   minute  but   characteristically  subtle
 difference remaining is that it is not said, in the passage just cited, that
 when the envelope fell to the floor  Gandalf 'set  it in  its place'  on the
 mantlepiece;  and  now  Gandalf  says  to  Frodo:  'He  left  a  packet with
 me  to give  to you.  Here it  is!' Then  Frodo took  the envelope  from the
 wizard.  In  FR  Gandalf  pointed  to it  on the  mantelpiece; he  would not
 sit  waiting  for  Frodo  with  the  envelope  containing  the  Ring  in his
 hand.                                                                       
   Once again the  list of  Bilbo's labelled  legacies changes  (see VI.247),
 in  that  Uffo  Took  now  receives  the  final  name  Adelard,   while  the
 somnolent  Rollo  Bolger,  recipient  of  the  feather-bed,  makes  his last
 appearance,  his  first  name  changed  to  Odovacar,  in  A;  in  B  he has
 gone.                                                                       
   The  conversation  between   Gandalf  and   Frodo  at   Bag  End   on  the
 following  day  (see  VI.242-3)  now  becomes  precisely as  in FR  with, of
 course,  the  one  major  difference  that  there  is  no  reference  to the
 variant  stories which,  Bilbo had  told concerning  his acquisition  of the

                                                                
                                                                          
 Ring (p. 49).  The rewriting  of this  conversation again  clearly springs
 from the note of August  1939 (VI.374)  referred to  above, to  the effect
 that Gandalf still did not know  very much  about the  Ring at  this time;
 for  Gandalf  now  knows  less about  it than  he had  done. He  no longer
 warns  Frodo against  allowing it  to gain  power over  him, nor  is there
 now  any  mention  in their  conversation of  Bilbo's state  of 'preserva-
 tion',  and his  restlessness, as  concomitants of  his possession  of the
 Ring.                                                                     
   The  revision  got  rid  of   the  Dwarf   Lofar,  who   had  previously
 remained  at  Bag  End  after  Bilbo's departure  with the  other Dwarves,
 but  at  first  provided  no  dear  substitute  for  Frodo's  aide-de-camp
 whose task (as it turned out) was to  receive the  Sackville-Bagginses. In
 the fair copy B this is Merry, as in FR; but  in the  draft revision  A my
 father  replaced  Lofar  by one  scribbled name  after another:  'Merry' >
 'Peregrin  Boffin'  >  'Folco  Took';  at  subsequent occurrences  in this
 episode  'Peregrin  Boffin'  >  'Folco',  and  once  'Peregrin'  retained.
 'Peregrin Boffin' had been moved from the  role of  Trotter in  his youth,
 but survived as  one of  Frodo's intimates:  as such  we have  already met
 him (pp. 8, 11). See further pp. 30-2.                                    
                                                                          
                       Chapter II: 'Ancient History'                       
                                                                          
 This  chapter (ultimately  one of  the most  worked upon  in all  The Lord
 of  the  Rings)  underwent  very  substantial  rewriting  at this  time in
 certain passages, but remained still in  important respects  far different
 from  'The  Shadow  of  the  Past'  in  FR.  The 'third  phase' manuscript
 (VI.318  ff.),  not  much  changed  in substance  from the  second version
 (VI.250 ff.), was reduced to a  wreck in  the process;  and here  again my
 father  made  a new  text (B)  of the  chapter, taking  up all  this rough
 correction  and   new  writing   (A),  but   incorporated  into   the  new
 manuscript  those  parts  of  the  old  that  were  retained more  or less
 intact, so that the new version is again textually a hybrid.              
   In  draft  revision  of the  beginning of  the chapter  Frodo's 'closest
 companions   were   Folco   Took    [pencilled   above:    Faramond]   and
 Meriadoc   Brandybuck   (usually   called   Merry),   both  a   few  years
 younger  than  himself'  (cf.   VI.318);  in   B  his   companions  become
 Faramond   Took,  Peregrin   Boffin,  and   Hamilcar  Bolger,   while  his
 closest friend  was Merry  Brandybuck. With  this cf.  the notes  given on
 p. 8. In the drafts  (A) the  names Folco,  Faramond, Peregrin,  shift and
 replace each other at every occurrence, and it is scarcely possible to say
 whether characters or merely names are in question.                       
   Otherwise,  the  new  version reaches  the final  form in  most respects
 for a long stretch. The chronology of Gandalf  s visits  to Bag  End, from
 the Party to the time of this chapter,  becomes precisely  that of  FR (p.
 55); but  the passage  (FR pp.  52-3) concerning  the 'rumours  of strange

 things happening in the world outside'  was at  this stage  left virtually
 unchanged - which means that it still  essentially took  the form  it had
 in the second version, VI.253-                                          
  The first  part  of  the  conversation  between  Gandalf  and  Frodo now
 takes  a  great  step  towards  that in  FR (pp.  55-6; cf.  VI.319), but
 Gandalf  as yet  says nothing  of the  making of  rings 'in  Eregion long
 ago', nor does he  speak here  of the  Great Rings,  the Rings  of Power.
 Though his words are the same as in FR, they  apply only  to the  ring in
 Frodo's possession: thus he says 'Those who keep this  ring do  not die,'
 &c. His account of Bilbo's knowledge of and feeling  about his  ring are
 very much as in FR, but he says here  that Bilbo  'knew, of  course, that
 it made one invisible, if it encircled any part of the body.'  In rejected
 drafts for this passage occur the following:                            
                                                                        
   He  certainly  had  not yet  begun to  connect his  long life  and 'good
   preservation' with the ring -  but he  had begun  to feel  the restless-
   ness that is the first symptom of the stretching of the days.          
                                                                        
   On that last evening  I saw  plainly that  the ring  was trying  to keep
   hold  of  him  and  prevent  his  parting with  it. But  he was  not yet
   conscious of it  himself. And  certainly he  had no  idea that  it would
   have  made  him  permanently  invisible,  nor  that  his  long  life and
   'good  preservation'   -  how   the  expression   annoyed  him!   -  had
   anything to do with it.                                               
                                                                        
   From Frodo's  question at  the end  of Gandalf  s remarks  about Bilbo,
 the new version retains  the existing  text (VI.319)  concerning Gandalf's
 memories, but is then developed quite differently, though still  far from
 that of FR (p. 57):                                                     
                                                                        
    'How long have you known?' asked Frodo again.                        
    'I  knew  very  little  of  these things  at first,'  answered Gandalf
 slowly,  as  if   searching  back   in  memory.   The  days   of  Bilbo's
 journey  and  the   Dragon  and   the  Battle   of  Five   Armies  seemed
 dim  and  far   off,  and   many  other   dark  and   strange  adventures
 had  befallen  him  since.  'Let  me  see  -  it  was  after   the  White
 Council  in  the  South that  I first  began to  give serious  thought to
 Bilbo's  ring.  There  was  much  talk  of  rings  at  the  Council: even
 wizards  have  much  to  learn  as  long  as  they  live,   however  long
 that  may  be.  There  are  many  sorts  of  ring,  of  course.  Some are
 no   more   than   toys  (though   dangerous  ones   to  my   mind),  and
 not  difficult  to  contrive  if you  go in  for such  things -  they are
 not  in  my  line.  But  what  I  heard  made  me  think  a   good  deal,
 though  I  said  nothing  to  Bilbo.   All  seemed   well  with   him.  I
 thought  he  was  safe  enough  from  any  evil  of  that  sort.   I  was
 nearly  right  but  not  quite   right.  Perhaps   I  should   have  been

 more  suspicious,  and  have  found  out  the truth  sooner than  I did
 - yet if I had, I don't know what else could have been done.           
   'Then,  of course,  I noticed  that he  did not  seem to  grow older.
 But  the  whole  thing  seemed  so   unlikely  that   I  did   not  get
 seriously  alarmed,  never  until  the  night  he  left this  house. He
 said   and   did  things   then  that   were  unmistakeable   signs  of
 something   wrong.   From  that   moment  my   chief  anxiety   was  to
 get him  to go  and give  up the  ring. And  I have  spent most  of the
 years since in finding out the truth about it.'                        
   'There   wasn't   any   permanent  harm   done,  was   there?'  asked
 Frodo  anxiously.  'He  would  get  right  in  time,  wouldn't he  - be
 able to rest in peace, I mean?'                                        
   'That  I  don't  know  for  certain,'  said  Gandalf. 'There  is only
 one  [added:  Power]  in  this  world  who  knows  all  about  the ring
 and  its  effects.  But  I  don't  think  you  need  fear  for  him. Of
 course,  if  anyone  possessed  the  ring  for  many  years,  it  would
 probably  take  a  long while  for the  effects to  wear off.  How long
 is  not  really  known.  He  might live  for ages.  But not  wearily, I
 think.  He  would,  I  now  believe,  just  stop  as  he  was  when  he
 parted with  the ring;  and would  be happy,  if he  parted with  it of
 his  own  accord  and  with  good  intent.  Though  as  far  as  I know
 that  has  only  happened  once.   I  was   not  troubled   about  dear
 Bilbo any more, once  he had  let the  ring go.  It is  for you  that I
 feel responsible...'(5)                                                   
                                                                       
   There is of course no reference here to Bilbo's 'two stories'  of how
 he  came  by  the  Ring;   nor  does   Saruman  appear.   Yet  Gandalf's
 mention  of  the  discussion  of Rings  at the  White Council,  and his
 suggestion that there are wizards who, unlike himself, 'go in  for such
 things', prepares the place that Saruman would fill when he  had arisen
 - although, characteristically, he did not arise in order to  fill that
 place.                                                                 
   The  new  version  introduced no  changes into  Gandalf s  account of
 the  Ruling Ring  and its  history (for  the text  as it  had developed
 through  the  three  preceding  versions  see  VI.78,  258-61, 319-20):
 indeed almost all of this part of the chapter is constituted from pages
 taken out of the 'third phase' manuscript (see p.  18). Before  the new
 version  of  the  chapter  was  completed,  however  (see note  12), my
 father  changed  Gollum's  original  name  from Digol  (through Deagol)
 to Smeagol, and introduced a rider telling the story of Deagol  and his
 murder:                                                                
                                                                       
   He  had  a  friend  called  Deagol,  of  similar  short, sharper-eyed
 but  not  so  quick  and  strong.  They  were  roaming  together,  when

                              
                                                                         
 in  the  mud  of  a  river-bank, under  the twisted  roots of  an ancient
 thorn-tree,(6) Deagol   found   the   Ring.   Smeagol   came   up   behind
 him,  just  as  he  was  washing  the  mud  off,  and  the  Ring  gleamed
 yellow.                                                                  
      'Give  us  that,  Deagol my  love,' said  Smeagol over  his friend's
 shoulder.                                                                
      'Why?' said Deagol.                                                 
      'Because it's my birthday...                                        
                                                                         
 The remainder of the inserted text  is virtually word for  word as  in FR
 (p. 62). On this new story see pp. 27-8.                                 
                                                                         
      Very substantial rewriting begins again with Gandalf's discussion of
 Gollum's  motives  (FR  pp. 63-6;  for the  previous versions  see VI.79-
 80,  261-2,  320-2).  Here  there is  more than  one draft  preceding the
 new  manuscript  B,  and  the  relations  between  these  texts  are  not
 entirely clear, though they differ chiefly only in the placing  of certain
 elements. I give this passge in the form  of B,  with some  variants from
 the drafts A recorded in the notes.                                      
                                                                         
      'Gollum!'   said   Frodo.   'Do   you   mean   the    very   Gollum-
 creature that Bilbo met? Is that his history? How loathsome!'           
      'I think it is a sad  story,' said  the wizard,  'and it  might have
 happened to others, even to some hobbits I have known.'                  
      'I  can't  believe  Gollum  was  connected  with   hobbits,  however
 distantly,'   said   Frodo   with   some   heat.   'What   an  abominable
 idea!'                                                                   
      'It is true all the same,'  replied Gandalf.  'It is  suggested even
 by  Bilbo's   own  account;   and  partly   explains  the   very  curious
 events.  There  was  a  lot  in  the  background   of  their   minds  and
 memories   that   was   very   similar:   Bilbo  and   Gollum  understood
 one  another  (if  you  think  of  it)  better  than  hobbits  have  ever
 understood   dwarves   or   goblins,   or  even   elves.  Think   of  the
 riddles they both knew, for one thing!'                                  
      'But  why  did  Gollum  start  the Riddle-game,  or think  of giving
 up the Ring at all?' asked Frodo.(7)                                     
      'Because  he  was  altogether  miserable,  and  yet  could  not make
 up  his  wretched  mind.  Don't  you  realize   that  he   had  possessed
 the  Ring   for  ages,   and  the   torment  was   becoming  unendurable?
 He  was  so  wretched  that  he  knew  he  was   wretched,  and   had  at
 last  understood  what  caused  it.  There  was  nothing  more   to  find
 out,  nothing  left  but  darkness,  nothing  to  do  but  furtive eating
 and  regretful   remembering.  Half   his  mind   wanted  above   all  to

 be rid of the  Ring, even  if the  loss killed  him. But  he hated
 parting with it as much as keeping it. He wanted to hand it  on to
 someone else, and to make him wretched too.'                     
   'Then why didn't he give it to the Goblins?'                   
   'Gollum  would  not  have  found   that  amusing!   The  Goblins
 were  already  beastly  and  miserable. And  anyway he  was afraid
 of them: naturally he had no fancy for an invisible goblin  in the
 tunnels. But when Bilbo turned up half  his mind  saw that  he had
 a  marvellous chance;  and the  other half  was angry  and fright-
 ened, and was  thinking how  to trap  and eat  Bilbo. So  he tried
 the  Riddle-game,  which  might  serve  either  purpose:  it would
 decide the question for him, like tossing up. Very  hobbit-like, I
 call that. But of course, if it had  really come  to the  point of
 handing  the  Ring  over,  he  would  have immediately  desired it
 terribly, and have hated Bilbo  fiercely. It  was lucky  for Bilbo
 that things were arranged otherwise.'                            
   'But how was  it that  Gollum did  not realize  that he  had got
 rid of it, if Bilbo had the Ring already?'                       
   'Simply because he had only lost it for a few hours:  not nearly
 long enough for him to  feel any  change in  himself. And  also he
 had not given it away of his own free will:  that is  an important
 point.  All  the  same I  have always  thought that  the strangest
 thing  about  Bilbo's  whole  adventure was  his finding  the Ring
 like that: just  putting his  hand on  it in  the dark.  There was
 something  mysterious in  that; I  think more  than one  power was
 at work. The Ring was trying  to get  back to  its master.  It had
 ruined  Gollum,  and  could  make no  further use  of him;  he was
 too  small  and  mean.  It  had already  slipped from  one owner's
 hand  and  betrayed him  to death.  It now  left Gollum:  and that
 would  probably  have  proved  Gollum's death,  if the  finder had
 not  been  the most  unlikely creature  imaginable: a  Baggins all
 the way from the Shire! But  behind all  that there  was something
 at  work  beyond  any design  of the  Ringmaker. I  can put  it no
 plainer than  by saying  that Bilbo  was meant  to find  the Ring,
 and not by its maker. In which case  you were  also meant  to have
 it, and that may be an encouraging thought, or it may not.'      
   'It isn't,' said Frodo, 'though I am not sure that  I understand
 you.  But  how  have  you  learned  all this  about the  Ring, and
 about Gollum? Do you really know it all, or are you guessing?'
   'I  have  learned  some  things,  and guessed  others,' answered
 Gandalf. 'But I am not going to give  you an  account of  the last
 few years  just now.  The story  of Gilgalad  and Isildur  and the

                           
                                                                       
   One Ring  is well  known to  the learned  in Lore.  I knew  it myself,
   of  course,  but  I  have  consulted  many  other  Lore-masters.  Your
   ring  is  shown  to  be  that  One  Ring  by  the  fire-writing, quite
   apart from other evidence.'                                          
        'And when did you discover that?' asked Frodo interrupting.     
        'Just now  in this  room, of  course,' answered  Gandalf sharply.
   'But  I  expected  to  find  it.  I  have  come  back  from  many dark
   journeys to make that final test.  It is  the last  proof, and  all is
   now  clear.  Making out  Gollum's part,  and fitting  it into  the gap
   in  the  history,  required  some  thought;  but  I guessed  very near
   the  truth.  I  know  more  of   the  minds   and  histories   of  the
   creatures of Middle-earth than you imagine, Frodo.'                  
        'But your account does not quite agree with Bilbo's, as far  as I
   can remember it.'                                                    
        'Naturally. Bilbo had no idea of the nature of  the Ring,  and so
   could  not  guess  what  was   behind  Gollum's   peculiar  behaviour.
   But  though  I  started  from  hints  and  guesses,  I no  longer need
   them.  I  am  no  longer  guessing  about  Gollum.  I  know.   I  know
   because I have seen him.'(9)                                         
        'You have seen Gollum!' exclaimed Frodo in amazement.           
        'The obvious thing to try and do, surely,' said Gandalf.        
        'Then  what  happened  after  Bilbo  escaped  from   him?'  asked
   Frodo. 'Do you know that?'                                           
        'Not  so  clearly.  What  I  have  told  you  is what  Gollum was
   willing to tell - though not, of course,  in the  way I  have reported
   it. Gollum is a liar, and you have  to sift  his words.  For instance,
   you  may  remember  that  he  told Bilbo  that he  had been  given the
   Ring  as  a  birthday  present  long  ago  when  such rings  were less
   uncommon.(10) Very unlikely  on  the  face  of  it:  no  kind  of  magic
   ring  was  ever common  in his  part of  the world.  Quite incredible,
   when  one  suspects  what ring  this one  really was.(11) It was  a lie,
   though  with  a  grain  of  truth.  I fancy  he had  made up  his mind
   what  to  say, if  necessary, so  that the  stranger would  accept the
   Ring  without  suspicion,  and  think  the gift  natural. And  that is
   another  hobbit-like   thought!  Birthday   present!  It   would  have
   worked  well  with  any hobbit.  There was  no need  to tell  the lie,
   of  course,  when  he  found  the  Ring  had  gone;  but  he  had told
   that lie to himself so many times  in the  darkness, trying  to forget
   Deagol,(12) that it  slipped  out, whenever  he spoke  of the  Ring. He
   repeated it to  me, but  I laughed  at him.  He then  told me  more or
   less the true story, but  with a  lot of  snivelling and  snarling. He
   thought he was misunderstood and ill-treated...                      

              
                                                                         
  In the third version of this  chapter Gandalf  had said  (VI.321): 'Very
 unlikely on the face of  it: incredible  when one  suspects what  kind of
 ring it really was. It was said merely to make Bilbo willing to accept it
 as  a  harmless  kind  of  toy'  (i.e., Gollum,  speaking -  according to
 Gandalf s elaborate theory - from that part  of his  mind that  wished to
 get rid of the Ring, said off  the top  of his  head that  it had  been a
 birthday present in order to get Bilbo to accept it more  readily). While
 drafting  a  new  version  of  this passage,  my father  was struck  by a
 perturbing  thought.  He  stopped,  and across  the manuscript  he wrote:
 'It must be [i.e. It must have been] a birthday present, as  the birthday
 present  is not  mentioned by  Gollum until  after he  finds the  ring is
 lost'.(13) In other words, if the story of its being a birthday present was a
 fabrication pure  and simple,  why should  Gollum only  trot it  out when
 there was no longer any use for it? Apparently in order to  counter this,
 Gandalf s words were changed:                                            
                                                                         
 It  was  a  lie,  though  with  a  grain of  truth. But  how hobbit-like,
 all  that  talk  of  birthday-presents!  I  fancy  he  had  made  up  his
 mind  what to  say, if  it came  to the  point of  giving, so  that Bilbo
 would  accept  the  Ring  without   suspicion,  and   think  it   just  a
 harmless  toy.  He  repeated  this  nonsense  to  me,  but  I  laughed at
 him.                                                                     
                                                                         
  The  implication  of  this  seems  to  be that  Gollum brought  out this
 story of the Ring having been  a birthday  present to  him long  ago only
 when  he found  that he  had it  no longer,  because it  had 'a  grain of
 truth'; and it was because it had 'a grain of truth' that he  had decided
 on this story. But there is no suggestion in the draft of what this grain
 of truth might be. Only with the fair copy B does it  appear -  and there
 only by implication: 'There was no need to tell the lie, of  course, when
 he  found the  Ring had  gone; but  he had  told that  lie to  himself so
 many times  in the  darkness, trying  to forget  Deagol, that  it slipped
 out,  whenever  he  spoke of  the Ring.'  This shows  of course  that the
 Deagol  story  (pp.23-4) had already  entered; but  my father  made the
 point clearer  by pencilling  on the  fair copy  after the  words 'though
 with a grain of truth': He murdered Deagol on his birthday.              
  He  was being  driven to  more and  more intricate  shifts to  get round
 what had been said in The Hobbit. But it seems to me very likely  that it
 was  precisely  while he  was pondering  this problem  that the  story of
 the  murder of  Deagol (and  incidentally the  changing of  Gollum's true
 name  to  Smeagol)  arose.  That  Gollum  had  lied  about  its  being  a
 birthday present was an  obvious necessity,  from the  story of  the Ring
 that  had  come into  being; but  Gandalf's theory  in the  third version
 that Gollum told this lie to Bilbo in order to get him to accept the Ring
 had a  serious weakness:  why did  Gollum only  do so  (as the  story was
 told in The Hobbit) after he found  that he  had lost  it? The  answer to

 this was  that it  was an  invention of  Gollum's that  he had  come partly
 to believe, quite independently of Bilbo's arrival; but why was that?      
   And  this  story  of  the  murder  of Deagol  on Smeagol's  birthday, the
 ground  of  Smeagol's  'lie  with  a  grain of  truth', became  a permanent
 element in the tale of Gollum; surviving  when, years  later, the  story of
 'Riddles in the Dark'  was recast  and the  very difficulty  that (if  I am
 right) had brought it into being was eliminated.                           
                                                                           
   From  'He  thought  he was  misunderstood and  ill-treated' (p.  26) this
 fourth version of  'Ancient History'  scarcely differs  for a  long stretch
 from  the  third,  whose  pages  were  largely  retained;(14) and since  the
 third version closely followed the  second, this  part of  the conversation
 of  Gandalf  and  Frodo  preserves,  apart from  detail of  expression, the
 text  given  in  VI.263-5.  But from  'The Wood-elves  have him  in prison,
 if he is still alive, as I expect; but they treat him with such kindness as
 they can find in their wise  hearts' the  new version  reaches the  form in
 FR  (p.  69)  with  almost  no  difference  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.
 Gandalf's  words  about  the  fire that  could melt  and consume  the Rings
 of Power (FR p. 70) remain however nearer to the earlier form:             
                                                                           
 It  has  been  said  that only  dragon-fire can  melt any  of the          
 Twenty Rings of Power; but there is  not now  any Dragon  left on          
 earth  in whom  the old  Fire is  hot enough  to harm  the Ruling          
 Ring. I can think of only  one way:  one would  have to  find the          
 Cracks  of  Doom in  the depths  of Orodruin,  the Fire-Mountain,          
 and cast the Ring in there, if he really wished to destroy it, or          
 put it beyond all reach until the End.                                     
                                                                           
 The  name  Orodruin  is  met  here for  the first  time.(15) In another point
 also the former version is  retained: Gandalf  still says  when he  goes to
 the window and draws aside the curtain (VI.322):                           
                                                                           
 'In any case it is now too late. You would come to hate me and             
 call me a thief; and our friendship would  cease. Such  is the             
 power of the Ring. Keep it, and together we will  shoulder the             
 burden that is laid on us.'                                                
                                                                           
 Lastly, Gandalf does not  in this  version give  Frodo a  'travelling name'
 ('When you go, go as Mr. Underhill', FR p. 72).                            
                                                                           
   The subsequent history of this  chapter, traced  in detail,  would itself
 almost  constitute a  book, for  apart from  the marvellous  intricacies of
 the  route by  which the  story of  Gollum and  the 'birthday  present' was
 ultimately  resolved,   Gandalf's  conversation   with  Frodo   became  the
 vehicle  for  the  developing  history  of the  Rings of  Power, afterwards
 removed  from  this   place,  and   the  chapter   could  not   be  treated
 separately  from  'The  Council  of  Elrond'.  But the  great mass  of this
 work,  and  probably  all  of  it,  belongs to  a later  time than  we have

 reached; and in any case  the attempt  to trace  in 'linear'  fashion the
 history of the writing of The Lord of the Rings cannot  at the  same time
 take full account of the great constructions that were rising  behind the
 onward movement of the  tale. So  far as  the story  of Bilbo  and Gollum
 is concerned it seems that this fourth version  of 'Ancient  History', in
 which my father was still constrained  within the  words of  the original
 story  told  in  The  Hobbit,  remained  for  some  time as  the accepted
 form.                                                                   
                                                                        
                      Chapter III: 'Three is Company'.                   
                                                                        
 The third version  of this  chapter, described  in VI.323  - 5,  was also
 revised  at  this  time.  The  title  was  now  changed from  'Delays are
 Dangerous'  to  'Three  is  Company'  (cf.  the original  title, 'Three's
 Company  and  Four's  More',  VI.49  and note  2); and  the order  of the
 opening  passages  was reversed,  so that  the chapter  now begins  as in
 FR with '  "You ought  to go  quietly, and  you ought  to go  soon," said
 Gandalf',  and  his  conversation  with  Frodo precedes  the speculations
 in  the  Ivy  Bush  and  Green  Dragon  (see  VI.274  and  note  1). This
 reorganisation  and  rewriting  was  very  roughly done  on the  pages of
 the  third phase  manuscript and  on inserted  riders ('A');  the revised
 opening  was  then  written  out fair  ('B'), as  far as  Gaffer Gamgee's
 conversation  with  the  Black Rider  in Bagshot  Row, and  the remainder
 of the existing text added to it,  to form  textually speaking  a hybrid,
 just as in the case of the first two chapters.                          
   The draft revision A of  Gandalf s  departure from  Bag End  takes this
 form:                                                                   
                                                                        
   Gandalf   stayed   at   Bag-End   for   over   two   months.   But  one
 evening,   soon   after  Frodo's   plan  had   been  arranged,   he  sud-
 denly  announced  that  he  was   going  off   again  next   morning.  'I
 need  to stretch  my legs  a bit,  before our  journey begins,'  he said.
 'Besides,  I  think  I  ought  to  go  and  look  round,  and   see  what
 news I can pick up down south on the borders, before we start.'         
   He  spoke  lightly,  but  it  seemed  to  Frodo  that he  looked rather
 grave   and   thoughtful.   'Has  anything   happened?  Have   you  heard
 something?' he asked.                                                   
   'Well,  yes,  to  tell you  the truth,'  said the  wizard, 'I  did hear
 something  today  that  made  me  a   bit  anxious.   But  I   won't  say
 anything,  unless  I  find  out  more   for  certain.   If  I   think  it
 necessary   for   you   to   get  off   at  once,   I  shall   come  back
 immediately. In the meanwhile stick to your plan...'                    
                                                                        
 The remainder of his farewell words  are as  in FR  (p. 76),  except that
 he  says  'I  think  you  will  need my  company on  the Road',  not that

                                   
                                                                           
  'after all' Frodo 'may' need it. As written in the fair copy B  the passage
  is  the  same  as  this,  except  that  Gandalf  no  longer refers  to 'our
  journey -  he says:  I need  to stretch  my legs  a bit.  There are  one or
  two things I must see to: I have been idle longer than  I should';  and his
  last  words  are:  'I  think  after  all you  will need  my company  on the
  Road.'                                                                    
                                                                           
     Frodo's  friends,  who  came to  stay with  him to  help in  the packing
  up  of  Bag  End,  are  now  (as  also  in  the  contemporary  rewriting of
  'Ancient  History',  p.  21)  Hamilcar  Bolger,  Faramond  Took,(16) and his
  closest  friends  Peregrin  Boffin   and  Merry   Brandybuck.  It   is  now
  Hamilcar  Bolger  who  goes  off  to  Buckland  with  Merry  in  the  third
  cart.(17) In the  draft  revision  A  'Peregrin  Boffin  went  back  home to
  Overhill  after  lunch',  whereas  in  B  'Faramond  Took  went  home after
  lunch,  but  Peregrin  and  Sam  remained  behind',  and  Frodo  'took  his
  own tea with  Peregrin and  Sam in  the kitchen.'  At the  end of  the meal
  'Peregrin  and Sam  strapped up  their three  packs and  piled them  in the
  porch.  Peregrin  went  out  for  a  last  stroll in  the garden.  Sam dis-
  appeared.'                                                                
     Throughout  these  manuscripts  'Pippin' appears  as a  later correction
  of  'Folco';  and in  the passage  referred to  above, naming  Frodo's four
  friends   who   stayed   at   Bag   End,   'Faramond   Took'   was  changed
  subsequently to  'Folco Boffin',  'Peregrin Boffin'  to 'Pippin  Took', and
  'Hamilcar  Bolger'  to  'Fredegar  Bolger'.   These,  with   Merry  Brandy-
  buck, are the four who  are present  on this  occasion in  FR (p.  76). But
  such  corrections  as  these  prove  nothing  as to  date: they  could have
  been entered on the manuscript at any subsequent time.                    
     Nonetheless, it must have been at  this stage,  I think,  that 'Peregrin
  Took'  or  'Pippin'  at  last  entered.  Under  Chapter  V   'A  Conspiracy
  Unmasked'  below,  it  will  be  seen that  in a  rewritten section  of the
  manuscript  from  this  time  (as  distinct  from  mere  emendation  to the
  existing 'third phase' text) not only does 'Hamilcar' appear,  as is  to be
  expected, but 'Pippin' appears for the first time as the text  was written.
  This  rewritten  section  of  'A  Conspiracy  Unmasked'  certainly  belongs
  to  the  same  time  as the  rewritten ('fourth  phase') parts  of 'Ancient
  History'  and  'Three  is  Company'.  The correction  of 'Folco  (Took)' to
  'Pippin' in these manuscripts  therefore does  in fact  belong to  the same
  period; though they are  carefully written  texts, the  final stage  in the
  evolution of  the 'younger  hobbits' was  taking place  as my  father wrote
  them; and  though at  the beginning  of the  B text  of 'Three  is Company'
  Frodo's  friend  was  Peregrin Boffin,  he may  have already  been Peregrin
  Took by the time he took his last stroll in the Bag End garden.           
     The question is not perhaps  worth spending  very long  on, since  it is
  now  very largely  one of  name simply,  but I  have followed  the tortuous
  trail too  long to  leave it  without an  attempt at  analysis at  the end.
  What  happened,  I  think,  was  as  follows.  Folco  Took  of  the  'third

  phase'  (who  had an  interesting and  complex genesis  out of  the original
  'young  hobbits',  Frodo  (Took)   and  Odo,   see  VI.323-4)   was  renamed
  Faramond  Took  (p.  15,  note  1).  At  this  time  'Peregrin  Boffin', who
  had first entered as  the 'explanation'  of Trotter,  became one  of Frodo's
  younger friends. This is the situation  in the  rewritten or  'fourth phase'
  portions  of  Chapters  II and  III (pp.  21, 30).  In Chapter  III Faramond
  Took  'went  home  after  lunch',  and  he  is  then   out  of   the  story.
  'Peregrin' and Sam  stayed on  at Bag  End, and  it is  clear that  they are
  going to be Frodo's companions on the walk to Buckland.                     
    'Peregrin' (Boffin) is  thus stepping  into the  narrative place  of Folco
  (briefly  renamed  Faramond)  Took;  or  rather  -  since the  narrative was
  now  in  a finished  form -  this name  takes over  the character.  Just why
  Folco/Faramond  Took  would  not  do  I  cannot  say  for  certain.  It  may
  have  been  simply  a  preference  of  names.  But if  Faramond Took  is got
  rid  of  and  Peregrin Boffin  made the  third member  of the  party walking
  to  Buckland,  there would  be no  Took at  all: my  father would  have left
  himself   with  a   Baggins,  a   Boffin,  a   Brandybuck,  and   a  Gamgee.
  Perhaps  this  is  why  the Boffin  was changed  into a  Took, and  the Took
  into  a  Boffin:  Peregrin  Boffin  became  Peregrin  (or Pippin)  Took, and
  Faramond  Took,   reverting  to   his  former   name  Folco,   became  Folco
  Boffin  (who  'went  home  after  lunch'  in FR,  p. 77).  These corrections
  to  the  new  text  of  Chapter  III  were evidently  made before  my father
  rewrote the ending  of Chapter  V, where  'Pippin' first  appears in  a text
  as written and not by later correction.                                     
    Thus  it  is  that  Peregrin  Took  of LR  occupies the  same genealogical
  place  as  did  Frodo  Took  of the  earliest phases  (see VI.267,  note 4):
  and  thus  'Folco'  of  the  'third phase'  manuscripts is  corrected every-
  where to 'Pippin'.                                                          
    It would be legitimate, I think, to see in all this a single or particular
  hobbit-character,  who  appears  under  an  array  of  names:   Odo,  Frodo,
  Folco,   Faramond,    Peregrin,   Hamilcar,    Fredegar,   and    the   very
  ephemeral   Olo   (VI.299)  -   Tooks,  Boffins,  and  Bolgers.   Though  no
  doubt a very 'typical' hobbit of the Shire, this 'character' is  in relation
  to  his  companions  very  distinct:  cheerful,  nonchalant,  irrepressible,
  commonsensical,  limited,  and  extremely  fond  of  his  creature comforts.
  I will  call this  character 'X'.  He begins  as Odo  Took, but  becomes Odo
  Bolger. My father  gets rid  of him  from the  first journey  (to Buckland),
  and  as  a  result  Frodo  Took  (Merry  Brandybuck's  first   cousin),  who
  had  been  potentially  a  very  different  character  (see  VI.70), becomes
  'X',  while  retaining  the  name  Frodo  Took.  Odo,   however,  reappears,
  because  he  has   gone  on   ahead  to   Buckland  with   Merry  Brandybuck
  while  the  others  are  walking;  he  may be  called 'XX'.  He will  have a
  separate  adventure,  riding  with  Gandalf  to  Weathertop  and  ultimately
  turning  up  again  at  Rivendell,  where  (for  a  very  brief time  in the
  development  of  the  narrative)  he  will  rejoin  'X', now  renamed 'Folco
  Took' (since Bingo Baggins has taken over the name Frodo).                  

   In the 'third phase' of the narrative, then, 'X' is Folco Took, Merry's
 cousin;  and  'XX'  is  Odo  Bolger.  But  now  'X'  is  renamed Faramond
 Took,  and  'XX'  is  renamed  Hamilcar  Bolger.  A new  character called
 Peregrin Boffin appears: beginning as a much  older figure,  originally a
 hobbit  of  the  Shire  who  became  through   his  experiences   a  most
 unusual person, known as 'Trotter', he, or rather  his name,  survives to
 become  one  of  Frodo's  younger  friends.  'Faramond  Took'  is  pushed
 aside  and  left  with  scarcely any  role at  all, becoming  the shadowy
 Folco  Boffin;  and  'Peregrin  Boffin',  becoming  'Peregrin   Took'  or
 'Pippin', becomes 'X' - and Merry's first cousin.                        
   Looking back to the beginning, therefore, 'Pippin'  of LR  will largely
 take over 'Odo's' remarks; but as I said (VI.70), 'the way in  which this
 came  about  was  strangely  tortuous,  and  was  by  no  means  a simple
 substitution  of  one  name  for  another.' For  Pippin is  Merry's first
 cousin,  and  is  derived  through   Folco/Faramond  from   the  original
 Frodo  Took:  he  is  not  derived  from  Odo,  who  was  moved sideways,
 so to speak,  becoming Hamilcar  (Fredegar). But  Pippin is  derived from
 Odo, in the sense that he like Odo is 'X'.                               
                                                                         
   For the rest, Lobelia  Sackville-Baggins' son,  while keeping  his name
 Cosimo,  loses  his  pimples  and  gains  'sandy-haired' as  his defining
 epithet. Gaffer  Gamgee's observation  on the  subject of  having Lobelia
 as his neighbour is  recorded: '  "I can't  abide changes  at my  time of
 life, said he (he was 99),(18) "and anyhow not changes for the worst.        
 In  FR  the Gaffer's  complaint was  reported by  Gandalf to  the Council
 of Elrond (p. 276).                                                      
   From  the  point  where  my  father merely  retained the  manuscript of
 the 'third phase', and in subsequent chapters,  'Folco' was  corrected to
 'Pippin'.                                                                
                                                                         
                  Chapter IV: 'A Short Cut to Mushrooms'.                 
                                                                         
 In this case the third phase manuscript was  retained intact  (apart from
 'Peregrin' or  'Pippin' for  'Folco' throughout),  the final  form having
 already been attained (see VI.325).                                      
                                                                         
                    Chapter V: 'A Conspiracy Unmasked'                    
                     (with 'The Dream of the Tower').                    
                                                                         
 A rough draft of a rewriting of the end of this chapter survives (for the
 previous  forms  of  the passage  see VI.104-5,  301 -  2, 326).  Odo has
 become  Hamilcar,  and  the  conversation  proceeds  now  almost  exactly
 as  in  FR  p.  118: that  Hamilcar should  stay behind  was part  of the
 original  plan.  Frodo  no   longer  gives   a  letter   to  Odo/Hamilcar
 (VI.326),  but says:  'It would  not have  been safe  to leave  a written
 message: the  Riders might  get here  first, and  search the  house.' The

                                                             
                                                                         
 only elements  in FR  that are  still lacking  are that  Hamilcar's family
 came  from  Budgeford  in  Bridgefields,(19) and that  'he had  even brought
 along some old clothes of Frodo's to help him in  playing the  part.' This
 rewriting  stops  before the  account of  Frodo's dream  that night,  of a
 sea of tangled  trees and  something snuffling  among the  roots (VI.302),
 but it is clear that at this stage it remained unchanged.                
   It is necessary  here to  turn aside  for a  moment from  the end  of 'A
 Conspiracy  Unmasked'  and  to bring  in a  remarkable brief  narrative of
 this time, extant  in several  texts, which  may be  called 'The  Dream of
 the Tower'. In the narrative  outline dated  'Autumn 1939'  given on  p. 9
 Gandalf  is  'besieged  in  the Western  Tower. He  cannot get  away while
 they  guard  it  with  five  Riders.  But when  Black Riders  have located
 Frodo  and  found  that  he  has  gone  off  without  Gandalf   they  ride
 away.' This is what Frodo saw in his dream.                              
   My father was much exercised about  the placing  of it  (see p.  11). In
 the  Time-schemes  A  and  B  the  date  of  Gandalf's  escape   from  the
 Western  Tower  was  first  given  as  24  September,   and  there   is  a
 suggestion  that  Frodo dreamt  his dream  of the  event that  night, when
 with  the  Elves  in  the  Woody  End. The  date was  then changed  to the
 25th,  when  Frodo  was  at  Crickhollow,  and  so  appears in  schemes A,
 B, and C. Scheme  D gives  no date  for Gandalf's  escape, and  places the
 'Dream  of  the  Tower' variously  on the  24th, 25th,  or 26th.  For some
 reason, however, my father decided  to place  it after  the event,  on the
 night  of  the  29th,  when  Frodo  was  at  Bree,  and  Gandalf   was  at
 Crickhollow.                                                             
   The  text  of  Frodo's  dream  at-Bree  is  found  in  three  forms, two
 preparatory  drafts  and  a  finished manuscript.(20) I give  it here  in the
 third form, since the only significant difference from the drafts  is that
 in  them  the  figure  who  summons the  watchers from  the Tower  is seen
 by  the  dreamer  ('another dark-robed  figure appeared  over the  brow of
 the hill: it beckoned and gave a shrill call in a strange tongue').      
   The  narrative  begins  almost  exactly  as  in  FR  p. 189,  with Frodo
 waking  suddenly  in  the  room  at  The  Prancing  Pony,  seeing  Trotter
 sitting alert in his chair, and falling asleep again.                    
                                                                         
   Frodo  soon  went  to   sleep  again;   but  now   he  passed   at  once
 into  a  dream.  He  found  himself  on  a  dark  heath.  Looking  up,  he
 saw  before  him  a  tall  white  tower,  standing   alone  upon   a  high
 ridge.  Beyond  it  the  sky  was  pale,   and  far   off  there   came  a
 murmur  like   the  voices   of  the   Great  Sea   which  he   had  never
 heard  nor  beheld,  save  in  other  dreams.   In  the   topmost  chamber
 of the tower there shone dimly a blue light.                             
   Suddenly   he   found   that   he   had   drawn   near  and   the  tower
 loomed   high   above  him.   About  its   feet  there   was  a   wall  of
 faintly  shining  stones,  and  outside  the  wall  sat  silent  watchers:

                                     
                                                                           
 black-robed  figures  on  black  horses,  gazing  at   the  gate   of  the
 tower without moving, as if they had sat there for ever.                   
  There  came  at  last  the  soft  fall  of hoofs,  climbing up  the hill.
 The  watchers   all  stirred   and  turned   slowly  towards   the  sound.
 They  were  looking  towards  Frodo.  He  did  not   dare  to   turn,  but
 he  knew  that   behind  him   another  dark   figure,  taller   and  more
 terrible,  had  appeared:  it  beckoned,  and  called  out  in  a  strange
 tongue.   The   horsemen   leaped   to  life.   They  raised   their  dark
 heads   towards   the   lofty   chamber,   and   their   mocking  laughter
 rang  out  cruel  and  cold;  then  they  turned   from  the   white  wall
 and rode down the hill like the wind. The blue light went out.             
  It  seemed  to  Frodo  that  the  riders   came  straight   towards  him;
 but  even  as  they  passed  over  him  and  beat  him  to the  ground, he
 thought  in  his  heart:  'I  am  not  here;  they  cannot hurt  me. There
 is  something  that  I  must  see.'  He lifted  his head  and saw  a white
 horse   leap   the   wall   and  stride   towards  him.   On  it   rode  a
 grey-mantled  figure:  his  white  hair  was  streaming,  and   his  cloak
 flew  like  wings  behind  him.  As   the  grey   rider  bore   down  upon
 him  he  strove  to  see  his  face.  The  light  grew  in  the  sky,  and
 suddenly there was a noise of thunder.                                     
                                                                           
  Frodo   opened   his   eyes.   Trotter   had   drawn  the   curtains  and
 had  pushed  back  the  shutters  with a  clang. The  first grey  light of
 day  was  in  the  room.  The  vision  of  his  dream  faded  quickly, but
 its  mingled  fear  and  hope  remained  with  him  all  the day;  and for
 long  the  far  sound  of  the  Sea  came  back  to  him   whenever  great
 danger was at hand.                                                        
  As  soon  as  Trotter  had  roused  them  all  he  led  the way  to their
 bedrooms.                                                                  
                                                                           
 The  manuscript  continues a  little further,  almost word  for word  as in
 FR,  and  ends  with  Butterbur's 'Guests  unable to  sleep in  their beds,
 and good bolsters ruined and all! What are we coming to?'                  
  Taking  into  account  the  words  of  the  outline  given  on  p.  9 that
 Gandalf, pursued  by the  Riders, tried  to get  round to  the west  of the
 Shire, and the mention of the sound of the Sea in the text, it is seen that
 Gandalf  had  fled  to  the  Elf-towers (21) on the  Tower Hills  beyond the
 west  marches of  the Shire  - those  towers which,  at the  very beginning
 of  the writing  of The  Lord of  the Rings,  Bingo said  that he  had once
 seen,  shining  white  in  the  Moon:  'the  tallest  was   furthest  away,
 standing alone on a hill' (VI.93; cf. VI.312 and FR p. 16).                
  Turning  back  to  'A   Conspiracy  Unmasked':   my  father   now  rewrote
 the  ending  again,  on the  basis of  the draft  already referred  to, and
 added  it  to  the  'third  phase'   manuscript,  rejecting   the  existing

 conclusion of the chapter.(22) In this new  text he  still kept  the original
 dream,  but  now combined  with it  the 'Dream  of the  Tower', transfer-
 ring it back from Frodo's night at Bree to his night at  Crickhollow (see
 p.  33).  Thus  Frodo  has  the  vision  of  Gandalf's  escape  from  the
 Western Tower on the night of the  event itself,  the 25th  of September.
 The new version reads thus, in part:                                    
                                                                        
   When  at  last  he  got  to  bed,  Frodo  could  not  sleep   for  some
 time.  His  legs  ached.  He  was  glad  that  he   was  riding   in  the
 morning.  Eventually  he   fell  into   a  vague   dream,  in   which  he
 seemed  to  be  looking  out  of  a  high  window  over  a  dark  sea  of
 tangled  trees.  Down  below  among  the  roots   there  was   the  sound
 of  creatures   crawling  and   snuffling.  He   felt  sure   they  would
 smell him out sooner or later.                                          
   Then  he  heard  a  noise  in  the  distance.  At  first he  thought it
 was  a  great  wind  coming  over  the  leaves  of  the  forest.  Then he
 knew  that  it  was  not  leaves,  but the  sound of  the Sea  far-off: a
 sound  he  had  never  heard  in  waking  life,   though  it   had  often
 troubled   other  dreams.   Suddenly  he   found  he   was  out   in  the
 open.  There  were  no  trees  after  all. He  was on  a dark  heath, and
 there  was  a  strange  salt  smell  in  the  air.  Looking  up   he  saw
 before  him  a  tall  white  tower, standing  alone on  a high  ridge. In
 its topmost chamber a blue light shone dimly.                           
   As   he  drew   nearer  the   tower  loomed   high  above   him.  About
 its  feet  there  was  a  wall  of faintly  gleaming stones,  and outside
 the  wall  sat  silent  watchers:  there  seemed  to  be  four blackrobed
 figures   seated   on  black   horses,  gazing   at  the   tower  without
 moving, as if they had sat there for ever.                              
   He  heard  the  soft  fall  of  hoofs  climbing  up  the   hill  behind
 him. The watchers all stirred...                                        
                                                                        
   From this point the vision is told in practically the same words  as in
 the previous text, and ends in the same way:  'A light  grew in  the sky,
 and  there  was  a noise  of thunder.'  When Frodo  had dreamt  the dream
 at Bree, the light in the sky and  the noise  of thunder  were associated
 with  Trotter's  opening  the  shutters  with  a clang  and the  light of
 morning entering the room.                                              
   In  this  text  'Pippin'  is  the name  that was  first written,  not a
 subsequent correction of 'Folco'; see p. 30.                            
   Later  (see  p.  139,  note  36), when  the story  of Gandalf  had been
 further changed, the description of the  Western Tower  and the  siege of
 the Riders was largely,-but not entirely, struck out on  this manuscript:
 the opening  was retained,  as far  as 'Looking  up he  saw before  him a
 tall white tower, standing alone on  a high  ridge.' At  the same  time a
 brief new conclusion was added:                                         

                                      
                                                                           
 A  great  desire  came  over  him  to climb  the tower  and see  the Sea.
 He   started  to   struggle  up   the  ridge   towards  the   tower;  but
 suddenly  a  light  came  in  the  sky,   and  there   was  a   noise  of
 thunder.                                                                   
                                                                           
  Thus altered,  this is  the text  of FR,  pp. 118  - 19.  And so  the tall
 white  tower  of Frodo's  dream at  Crickhollow in  the final  tale remains
 from  what  was  the  precursor  of  Orthanc;  and  the  thunder   that  he
 heard goes back to  the interruption  of his  dream by  Trotter's thrusting
 back  the  shutters  at  The  Prancing  Pony. But  Frodo would  still dream
 of Gandalf imprisoned  in a  tower: for  as he  slept in  the house  of Tom
 Bombadil he would see him standing on the pinnacle of Isengard.            
                                                                           
                       Chapter VI: 'The Old Forest'.                         
                                                                           
 The existing 'third  phase' manuscript  of this  chapter was  retained, but
 with a good deal of  correction, evidently  deriving from  different times.
 To  this  period  belong  the  alteration  of  'Odo'  to 'Hamilcar'  at the
 beginning of the chapter, and 'Folco' to  'Pippin'; I  would ascribe  to it
 also the attainment of the final form of  the hobbits'  descent out  of the
 forest to the Withywindle  (see VI.327),  and the  final ascription  of the
 parts  in  the  encounter  with  Old  Man  Willow,  with  Merry  exchanging
 roles with Frodo as the one trapped  in the  tree and  the one  pushed into
 the river (ibid.).                                                         
                                                                           
                Chapter VII: 'In the House of Tom Bombadil'                 
                                                                           
 In  this  chapter  as  in the  last, the  existing manuscript  was retained
 intact.  As  the  story  stood in  that text,  Gandalf came  to Crickhollow
 and  routed  the  Riders on  the night  of Monday  26 September,  the first
 night  spent  by  the  hobbits  in  the  house  of  Tom  Bombadil,  and the
 account  of  the  attack  on   Crickhollow  was   introduced  as   a  short
 separate narrative in the body of Chapter VII  (see VI.303  - 4,  328). But
 this  had  now  been  changed,  and  the  attack by  the Riders  delayed by
 three  days,  with  the  postponement  of  Gandalf's  coming  to  Bree.  My
 father  therefore  wrote on  the manuscript  at this  point: 'This  did not
 occur till Sept. 29', i.e. the night passed by the hobbits at Bree (see the
 time-schemes  tabulated  on  p.  12).  The  episode  was  now in  the wrong
 chapter, and was struck from the text here.                                
  It is often difficult  or impossible  to say  with certainty  when changes
 to  the  manuscripts  that  are  unrelated  to  movements in  the narrative
 structure  (or  to  movements  in  names)  were  made.  Thus  the introduc-
 tion  of  Frodo's  dream  of  Gandalf  on Orthanc  is obviously  later; but
 the  striking  out  of  'I  am  Ab-Origine,  that's  what  I  am'  (and the
 substitution  of  Tom  s  words  in  FR,  p. 142:  Don t  you know  my name

             
                                                                          
 yet?...'),  and  of  'He  saw  the  Sun rise  in the  West and  the Moon
 following,  before  the new  order of  days was  made' (see  VI.329) may
 well belong to this time.                                                 
                                                                          
                 Chapter VIII: 'Fog on the Barrow-downs'.                 
                                                                          
 The  original manuscript  was again  retained, and  most of  the changes
 that were made to it were from a later  time (notably  those introducing
 Carn Dum and Angmar,  FR pp.  154, 157).  The final  page of  the 'third
 phase'  manuscript was  however rejected  and replaced  by a  new ending
 to the chapter,  most of  which is  found also  in a  preparatory draft,
 marked  'Revised ending  of VIII  to fit  revised plot  (concerning Gan-
 dalf's  delay  and  Trotter's  knowledge  of  the  name  Baggins)'.  Now
 Frodo says, 'Please note - all of you - that the  name Baggins  must not
 be mentioned again. I am Mr Green, if any  name must  be given.'  In the
 narrative of the third phase, as in that of the  second, Frodo  took the
 name  of  'Mr Hill  of Faraway'  (VI.280, 334).  'Green' as  a pseudonym
 (for Odo) goes back to the original version (VI.135 etc.).                
  At  this  time  Tom's   words  (VI.329)   'he  [Butterbur]   knows  Tom
 Bombadil,  and  Tom's  name  will  help  you.  Say  "Tom sent  us here",
 and he will treat  you kindly'  were rejected,  and Tom's  parting words
 in FR appear: 'Tom's country ends here: he will  not pass  the borders.'
 In this connection see the note given on p. 10 concerning the boundaries
 of  Tom's  domain:  there   my  father   was  thinking   of  harmonising
 Gandalf's remark at the Council of Elrond that  Bombadil never  left his
 own  ground  with  the  story  that  he  was   known  to   Butterbur  by
 supposing that  Tom's 'boundaries'  extended to  Bree. But  he concluded
 that  Tom  Bombadil  was  not  in  fact  known  to  Butterbur,  and  the
 changes here reflect that decision.                                       
                                                                          
                                  NOTES.                                   
                                                                          
 1. The texts in such a situation are often very tricky to  interpret, for
    there  are  these  possible  ingredients  or  components:  (1)   a  page
    from  the  'third  phase'  manuscript  corrected  but  retained;  (2)  a
    page  from  the  'third  phase'  manuscript  rejected and  replaced; (3)
    draft  version(s)  for  replacement  of  rejected  'third  phase'  manu-
    script;  (4)  fair  copy  replacement  of  rejected 'third  phase' manu-
    script  (with  or  without  preceding  draft).  A  correction, say  of a
    name,  made in  a case  of (1)  will stand  on the  same footing  in the
    textual history as the name first written in a case of  (3) or  (4), but
    the latter provide more certain indication of the relative dating.     
 2. With  Bilbo's remark  'I have  thought of  a nice  ending for  it: and
    he lived happily ever after to the end of his days' (FR  p. 41)  cf. the
    outline  $1  on  p. 5.  With the  passage that  follows, in  which Bilbo
    says of Frodo                                                          

     He  would  come  with  me,  of  course, if  I asked  him. In  fact he
     offered  to  once,  just  before the  party. But  he does  not really
     want to, yet. I  want to  see the  wild country  again before  I die,
     and the Mountains; but he is still in love with the Shire...         
                                                                         
     cf.  the  fragment  of  narrative given  in note  8 to  the preceding
     chapter (p. 15).                                                     
  3. Cf. the outline $1 on p. 5: 'Says  to Gandalf  he sometimes  feels it
     is like an eye looking at him.'                                      
  4. Gandalf's  words  'He  said  and  did  things  then that  were unmis-
     takeable signs of  something wrong'  refer of  course to  his parting
     conversation  with  Bilbo  in  this 'phase',  given on  pp. 19  - 20,
     where Bilbo's behaviour was still not violently  out of  character as
     it afterwards became.                                                
  5. This is the form of the text in B. The  draft A  has no  reference to
     the discussion of Rings at the White Council.                        
  6. At this stage the old story of  how the  Ring was  found 'in  the mud
     of  the  river-bank  under  the roots  of a  thorn tree'  (VI.78) was
     retained.                                                            
  7. In the later form of 'Riddles in the  Dark' in  The Hobbit  there was
     no  question  of  Gollum's  giving  up the  Ring, of  course: Bilbo's
     prize if he won  the competition  was to  be shown  the way  out, and
     Gollum only went back to his island in the  lake to  get the  Ring so
     that he might attack Bilbo invisibly.                                
  8. This passage, from 'But  of course...',  was added  to the  text, but
     it  takes  up a  draft passage  against which  my father  had written
     'Omit?':                                                             
     Yet  I  wonder  what  would  have  happened  in  the  end, if  he had
     been  obliged to  hand it  over. I  don't think  he would  have dared
     to  cheat  openly;  but  I am  sure he  would have  tried to  get the
     Ring  back.  He  would  have  immediately  desired  it  terribly, and
     have  hated  Bilbo  fiercely.  He would  have tried  to kill  him. He
     would have followed  him, visible  or invisible,  by sight  or smell,
     till he got a chance.'                                               
  9. The  draft  text  still  retained  the  curious  passage,  going back
     through the third to the second version of  the chapter  (VI.263), in
     which  Gandalf  has  Frodo  quote  the   first  riddle   that  Gollum
     asked,  and  then  says,  in  this  version:  'Roots  and  mountains:
     there's a good deal of Gollum's mind and history in that.'           
 10. This was said in the original story of Gollum in the first edition of
     The  Hobbit:  'in  the  end  Bilbo  gathered  that  Gollum had  had a
     ring - a wonderful, beautiful  ring, a  ring that  he had  been given
     for a birthday present,  ages and  ages before  when such  rings were
     less uncommon.'                                                      
 11. Draft texts still retain the wording of  the third  version (VI.321):
     'what kind of ring it really was.'                                   
 12. The  words  trying  to  forget Deagol  are a  part of  the text  B as

      written,  and  show  that  the  passage  (pp.  23-4)  concerning the
      murder  of  Deagol  was  inserted  before  this  version   was  com-
      pleted.                                                            
  13. In  the  original  story  in  The  Hobbit  it  was only  when Gollum
      came back from his  island in  the lake,  where he  had gone  to get
      the  'present',  that  Bilbo  learnt  -  from  Gollum's  'tremendous
      spluttering  and  whispering  and  croaking'  -  about the  ring and
      that it had been a birthday present; see note 10.                  
  14. The  change  noted  in  VI.320,  whereby  Gandalf  ceases to  be the
      one  who  actually  tracked  Gollum  down,  belongs to  this 'fourth
      phase'.                                                            
  15. Above -ruin was pencilled -naur, sc. Orodnaur.                     
  16. In  the  draft  revision  A  of  this  passage  Faramond  is  called
      'Faramond  II  and  the  heir  apparent';  cf.  VI.251,  where Fara-
      mond's  precursor  Frodo  Took  is called  'Frodo the  Second... the
      heir and rather  desperate hope  of the  Hole of  Took, as  the clan
      was called.'                                                       
  17. In the draft revision A at this point 'Ham  (that is  Hamilcar)' was
      replaced  by  'Freddy  (that  is  Fredegar)',  but  Ham/Hamilcar was
      then  restored.  Cf.  the note  dated August  1939 given  in VI.373:
      'Odo > Fredegar Hamilcar Bolger'.                                  
  18. In  the  genealogy  in  LR, Appendix  C, Gaffer  Gamgee was  92, and
      he died at the age of 102.                                         
  19. Neither  Budgeford  nor  Bridgefields  appear  on my  father's orig-
      inal map of the Shire  (frontispiece to  Vol. VI).  On my  large map
      of  the  Shire  made  in  1943  (VI.107)  both  names  were  lightly
      pencilled in by him, Budgeford being  the crossing  of the  Water by
      the road (pencilled in at the same time) to Scary. See note 22.
  20. The  second version  stands as  the opening  of a  chapter, numbered
      'X'  and  without title  (corresponding to  the 'second  opening' of
      Chapter  XI  'A Knife  in the  Dark' in  FR, after  the 'Crickhollow
      episode'); the third likewise,  but numbered  'XI' (because  by then
      the 'Bree' chapter had been divided, see p. 40), and with  an erased
      title 'The Way to Weathertop'.                                     
  21. In  some  rough  chronological  workings  there  is  a  reference to
      Gandalf's  being  besieged  in  'the  West  Towers',  which  is what
      Trotter called the Elf-towers in VI.155, 159.                      
  22. Hamilcar's  family  now  comes  from  Bridgefields  in  the Eastfar-
      thing.  Budgeford  was  written  in later,  perhaps much  later. See
      note 19.                                                           

                                    III.                                   
                           THE FOURTH PHASE (2):                           
                     FROM BREE TO THE FORD OF RIVENDELL.                   
                                                                          
             Chapter IX: 'At the Sign of the Prancing Pony (i).            
                       The Cow Jumped over the Moon'.                      
                                                                          
 The  'third  phase'  version  of  this  chapter  (VI.331  ff.)   had  been
 developed in two forms, in the first of which the story  of the  coming of
 Gandalf  and  Odo  to  Bree  was told  by Butterbur,  while in  the second
 (the 'red version' as my father  called it)  it was  told by  the narrator
 (VI.344 - 7);  and in  the second  the coming  of the  four Riders  to the
 west  gate  of  Bree  on  the  evening  of  Wednesday  28   September  was
 described  (VI.347  -  8). The  already complex  manuscript was  then used
 for a rough, drastic recasting of the narrative,  the 'blue  version' (see
 VI.343): this belongs with the new plot, and all reference  to a  visit of
 Gandalf  to  Bree  in the  days immediately  preceding Frodo's  arrival is
 cut  out.  A  'blue'  rider to  the original  'third phase'  manuscript is
 written on the back of a calendar page for September 1939.                
 So far as it went, this was effectively a  draft ('A')  for a  new version
 of this always crucial chapter; and in this case my  father set  aside the
 now  chaotic  'third  phase'  manuscript entirely  (though taking  from it
 the pages containing the text of The Cat and the Fiddle), and it  got left
 behind in England many years later; the  'fourth phase'  version is  a new
 manuscript  ('B'),  and  this  went  to Marquette.  Notably, this  bears a
 date on the first page: 'Revised Version Oct. 1939'.                      
 It  remained  at  this  time  a  single,  very  long   chapter,  extending
 through  FR  Chapter  10 'Strider';  but my  father decided  (doubtless on
 account of its length) to divide it into two chapters, 'IX' and  'X', both
 called 'At the Sign of the Prancing Pony', but with sub-titles;  and these
 names  remained  for  a  long  time.   This  arrangement   was  apparently
 made  soon  after  the new  text was  completed, and  it is  convenient to
 follow it here.                                                           
                                                                          
 The  new  version,  to  the  point  where  the  hobbits returned  from the
 common  room  of  the inn  after Frodo's  'accident', now  reaches, except
 in a few features, the  final form,  and variation  even from  the precise
 wording  of  FR  is  infrequent.  The  most  notable  respect in  which it
 differs is that at this stage my father preserved the account of the black
 horsemen  who  spoke  to  Harry  Goatleaf  the  gatekeeper on  the evening
 of the 28th of September:                                                 

   The  fog  that  enveloped  the  Downs  on  Wednesday afternoon          
 lay  deep  about Bree-hill.  The four  hobbits were  just waking          
 from their sleep beside the Standing Stone, when out of the mist          
 four horsemen rode from the  West and  passed through  the gates          
 at dusk....                                                               
                                                                          
 The episode closely follows that in the 'red version' of the 'third phase'
 (VI.347 - 8), but of course Harry Goatleaf no longer  refers to  'a hobbit
 riding  behind  an  old  man  on  a  white  horse,  last  night',  and his
 conversation with the Rider takes this form:                              
                                                                          
   'We want news!' hissed a cold voice through the key-hole.              
   'What of?' he answered, shaking in his boots.                           
   'News of hobbits, riding on ponies out of the Shire. Have they          
 passed?'                                                                  
   Harry  wished  they  had,  for  it  might  have  satisfied  these riders
 if  he  could  have  said  yes.  There  was  a threat  in the  cold voice;
 but he  dared not  risk a  yes that  was not  true. 'No  sir!' he  said in
 a   quavering   voice.   'There's   been   no   Shire-hobbits   on  ponies
 through Bree, and there isn't likely to be any.'                          
   A   hiss   came   through   the  key-hole,   and  Harry   started  back,
 feeling  as  if  something  icy  cold  had  touched   him.  'Yes,   it  is
 likely!'  said  the  voice  fiercely.  'Three,  perhaps  four.   You  will
 watch.  We  want  Baggins.  He  is   with  them.   You  will   watch.  You
 will tell us and not lie! We shall come back.'(1)                         
                                                                          
 This episode was struck  from the  text, but  I cannot  say when  this was
 done.                                                                     
   The  conversation  between  Frodo  and  Merry and  the gatekeeper  is as
 in  FR.  The gatekeeper  still however  calls out  to 'Ned'  (his brother,
 presumptively) to watch the gate  a while,  since he  has 'business  up at
 The  Pony'  (as  in  VI.349);  then  follows:  'He  had  been gone  only a
 moment,  and  Ned had  not yet  come out,  when a  dark figure  climbed in
 quickly over the gate and vanished  in the  dark in  the direction  of the
 inn.' The reference to Harry Goatleaf's  visit to  the inn  was afterwards
 struck out, and does not appear in FR (see below).                        
   There  is  now,  as  is  to be  expected, no  reference to  Tom Bombadil
 when   the   hobbits   arrive   at   The   Prancing   Pony,   and  Frodo's
 pseudonym is  'Mr Green'  (see p.  37); the  reference in  FR (p.  167) to
 the  Underhills  of Staddle  is of  course absent.  Folco is  still Folco,
 corrected to Pippin, which  shows that  this text  was written  before the
 revised  ending  of  Chapter  V  (pp. 30, 35).(2) Frodo still  noticed the
 gatekeeper   among  the   company  in   the  common   room  of   the  inn,
 wondering whether it  was his  night off  duty, but  this was  struck out,
 and  does  not  appear  in  FR. Folco/Pippin  now tells  the story  of the
 collapse  of  the  'Town  Burrow'  in  Michel  Delving,  though   the  fat

                               
                                                                             
 Mayor  is  unnamed.  Trotter  is  of  course  a  Man,  but the  description of
 him is that of the old versions (VI.137,  334): he  is still,  as he  was when
 he  was  a   hobbit,  'queer-looking,   brown-faced',  with   a  short-stemmed
 pipe under his long nose, and nothing is said of his boots (FR p. 168).      
      When  Bill  Ferney  and  the  Southerner  left  the  common  room, 'Harry
 the   gatekeeper  went   out  just   behind  them.'   This,  like   the  other
 references  to  the  gatekeeper's  presence  at  the  inn  noted   above,  was
 struck  out.  An isolated  note of  this time  proposes: 'Cut  out Harry  - he
 is unnecessary': clearly referring to his visit to the  inn after  the arrival
 of the  hobbits and  his vaguely  sinister association  with Bill  Ferney, not
 to his function as  gatekeeper, which  is certainly  necessary. It  is curious
 therefore  that  in  the  typescript  that  followed  the  present  manuscript
 this  last  reference,  though  very  clearly crossed  out in  the manuscript,
 was  reinstated,  and  so  appears  in  FR  (p.  172), but  quite anomalously,
 since all the  references to  his presence  at the  inn up  to this  point had
 been removed.                                                                
                                                                             
               Chapter X: 'At the Sign of the Prancing Pony (ii).            
                       All that is gold does not glitter'.                    
                                                                             
 In the 'blue version' recasting of the  'third phase'  narrative, or  'A', the
 story  of  Trotter's  'eavesdropping'  beside  the  Road  reaches   the  final
 form,  in  association  with  the  new  ending  to  Chapter  VIII (p.  37): he
 hears  the   hobbits  talking   with  Bombadil,   and  Frodo   declaring  that
 he  is  to be  called 'Mr  Green' (for  the previous  story, in  which Trotter
 overheard  Gandalf  and  Odo   talking,  see   VI.337).  After   Trotter's  'I
 should  advise  him  and  his friends  to be  more careful  what they  say and
 do' (FR p. 176) there follows in A:                                          
                                                                             
      'I  have  not  "left  my  name  behind",  as  you  put  it,'  said  Frodo
 stiffly.  'My  reason  for  taking  another  here  is  my  own  affair.  I  do
 not  see  why  my  real   name  should   interest  anyone   in  Bree;   and  I
 have  still  to  learn  why  it  interests  you.  Mr   Trotter  may   have  an
 honest   reason   for   spying  and   eavesdropping;  but   if  so   I  should
 advise him to explain it!'                                                   
      'That's  the line  to take!  ' laughed  Trotter. 'But  you wait  till old
 Butterbur  has   had  his   private  word   with  you   -  you'll   soon  find
 out   how   your   real   name   could  be   guessed,  and   why  it   may  be
 interesting  in   Bree.  As   for  myself:   I  was   looking  for   Mr  Frodo
 Baggins,   because  I   had  been   told  to   look  for   him.  And   I  have
 already    given    you    hints,    which    you    have    understood   well
 enough, that I know about the secret you are carrying.'                      
      'Don't  be  alarmed!'  he  cried,  as  Frodo  half  rose  from  his seat,
 and  Sam  scowled.  'I  shall  take  more   care  of   the  secret   than  you
 do. But now I had better tell you some more about myself.'                   

                                                                      
                                                                      
 At that moment he was interrupted by a knock at the door.             
 Mr Butterbur was there with a tray of candles...                      
                                                                      
 Butterbur  now  has  only  news  of the  Black Riders  to communicate.
 The story he tells is as before (VI.338-40), but the first Rider passed
 through  Bree on  the Tuesday,  not the  Monday, preceding,  three not
 four of them came to the inn-door, and of course he does not  refer to
 Gandalf  and  'Baggins'  (Odo)  having  gone  off eastwards.  The con-
 versation continues:                                                  
                                                                      
 ' "Baggins!"  said  I.  "If  you  are  looking  for  hobbits  of  that
 name,  you'd  best  look in  the Shire.  There are  none in  Bree. The
 last  time  one  of  that  name  came  here  was  nigh  on a  score of
 years  back.(3) Mr Bilbo  Baggins  he  was,   as  disappeared   out  of
 Hobbiton: he went off East long enough ago.                           
 'At  that  name  he  drew  in  his   breath  and   sat  up.   Then  he
 stooped  at  me  again.  "But  there  is  also  Frodo  Baggins,"  said
 he,(4) in a whisper like  a knife.  "Is he  here? Has  he been?  Do not
 lie to us!"                                                           
 'I was all of a twitter,  I can  tell you;  but I  was angry  as well.
 "No is the answer," said I;  "and you'll  get no  lies here,  so you'd
 best  be  civil.  If  you  have  any  message for  any party,  you may
 leave it, and I'll look  out for  them." "The  message is  wait," said
 he.  "We  may  return."  And  with  that  the  three  of  them  turned
 their  horses  and  rode  off  into the  fog. Now,  Mr Green,  what do
 you say to that?'                                                     
 'But  they  asked  for  Baggins,  you  say,  not  Green,'  said  Frodo
 warily.                                                               
 'Ah!'   said   the   landlord   with   a   knowing  wink.   'But  they
 wanted  news  of  hobbits  out  of  the  Shire,   and  such   a  party
 doesn't  come  here  often.  It  would  be  queer,  if there  were two
 different  parties.  And  as  for  Baggins:   I've  heard   that  name
 before.  Mr  Bilbo  was  here  more than  once, in  my dad's  time and
 mine;  and  some  funny  tales  have come  out of  the Shire  since he
 went  off:  vanished  with  a bang  while he  was speaking,  they say.
 Not that I  believe all  the tales  that come  out of  the West  - but
 here  you  go  vanishing  in  the middle  of a  song by  all accounts,
 right  in  my  house.  And when  I have  time to  scratch my  head and
 think,  I  remember  noticing  your  friends  call  you  Frodo,  and I
 begin  to  wonder  if  Baggins  should  not  come  next.  "Maybe those
 black  men  were  right,"  I  says  to  myself.  Now the  question is,
 what  shall  I  say,  if  they  come  back?  Maybe  you  want  to  see
 them,  and  more  likely  not.  They  mean  no  good  to  anyone, I'll
 wager.  Now  you  and your  friends seem  all right  in spite  of your

 pranks,  so  I  thought  I  had  best  tell  you  and  find out  what you
 wish.'                                                                   
   'They  mean  no  good  at  all,'  said  Frodo.  'I  did  not  know they
 had  passed  through  Bree,  or  I  should  have  stayed  quiet  in  this
 room,  and  I  wish  I  had. I  ought to  have guessed  it, from  the way
 the  gatekeeper  greeted  us  -  and  you,  Mr  Butterbur;  but  I  hoped
 perhaps  Gandalf  had  been  here  asking  for  us.  I  expect  you  know
 who  I  mean,  the  old  wizard.  We  hoped  to  find  him  here  or have
 news of him.'                                                            
   'Gandalf!'  said  the  landlord.  'Know  him!  I  should  think  I  do.
 He  was  here  not  so  long  back,  in  the  summer.  A  good  friend of
 mine  is  Gandalf,  and  many  a  good  turn  he  has  done  me.  If  you
 had  asked  after  him  sooner  I  should  have been  happier. I  will do
 what I can for any friends of his.'                                      
   'I  am  very grateful,'  said Frodo,  'and so  will he  be. I  am sorry
 I can't  tell you  the whole  story, but  I assure  you we  are up  to no
 mischief.  I  am  Frodo  Baggins,  as  you  guess,  and  these  -   er  -
 Black  Riders  are  hunting  for  me,  and  we  are  in danger.  I should
 be  thankful  for  any  sort  of  help, though  I don't  want you  to get
 into   trouble  on   my  account.   I  only   hope  these   Riders  won't
 come back.'                                                              
   'I  hope  not  indeed,'  said   the  landlord   with  a   shiver.  'But
 spooks  or  no  spooks,  they'll  have  to  mend  their  manners   at  my
 door.'                                                                   
                                                                         
   The latter part of this version is in hasty pencil, and soon after this
 point it peters  out without  further significant  development. Obviously
 Gandalf's letter will still come from Trotter, not from Butterbur.       
   As  I  have  said,  this revision  belongs with  the new  conception of
 Gandalf's  movements:  he  only  got ahead  of Frodo  and his  friends by
 racing  on  horseback  to  Weathertop  while  they  were  toiling through
 the Midgewater Marshes. In the  outline given  on p.  9 there  is mention
 of  a  visit of  Gandalf to  Bree before  Frodo set  out, and  before his
 captivity in the Western  Tower; and  Butterbur says  in this  draft that
 he saw him 'not so  long back,  in the  summer' (cf.  also note  1). This
 led, I think, to the bringing back of the  story (present  in one  of the
 alternative versions of the original 'Bree' chapter, VI.156) that  it was
 Butterbur and not Trotter who had the  letter from  Gandalf; and  this in
 turn led to refinement of the scene at the inn where Trotter  proves that
 he is a friend.                                                          
                                                                         
   As  in  the  draft  A  above  (p.  42),  in the  new or  'fourth phase'
 manuscript  B  Trotter  says:  'I  was  looking  for  Mr  Frodo  Baggins,
 because I had been told to  look for  birn.' But  an important  change in
 the structure  now enters.  In A  Trotter has  just said  'But now  I had

                                      
                                                                       
 better tell you some more  about myself'  when he  is interrupted  by Mr
 Butterbur's knock on the door - an interruption at this point  that goes
 back through the earlier  versions: see  VI.338 ('third  phase'), VI.150
 (original text). In the new account, Trotter is not interrupted  at this
 point. After saying that he will take more care of the secret  than they
 do, the story now proceeds thus:                                       
                                                                       
 '... But   now   I   had  better   tell  you   some  more.'   He  leaned
 forward   and   looked   at   them.   'Black   horsemen    have   passed
 through  Bree,'  he  said  in  a  low  voice.  'On  Tuesday  morning one
 came   up   the  Greenway;   and  two   more  appeared   later.  Yester-
 day  evening  in  the  fog  three  more   rode  through   the  West-gate
 just  before  it  was  closed.  They  questioned  Harry  the  gatekeeper
 and   frightened   him   badly.   I   heard   them.   They   also   went
 eastward.'                                                             
                                                                       
  There  follows  a  passage quite  closely approaching  that in  FR (pp.
 176 - 7, from 'There was a silence'),  with Frodo's  regret that  he had
 gone to the common room of the  inn, and  Trotter's recounting  that the
 landlord had  prevented him  from seeing  the hobbits  until it  was too
 late. But to  Frodo's remark  that the  Riders 'seem  to have  missed me
 for the present, and to have gone on ahead' Trotter replies:           
                                                                       
  'I  should  not  be  too  sure  of  that.  They  are cunning,  and they
 divide  their  forces.  I  have  been  watching  them.  Only   six  have
 passed  through  Bree.  There  may  be  others.  There  are   others.  I
 know   them,   and   their   proper   number.'   Trotter    paused   and
 shivered.  'Those  that  have  passed  on  will  probably   return,'  he
 went  on.  'They  have  questioned  folk  in  the  village  and outlying
 houses,  as  far  as  Combe  [> Archet],  trying to  get news  by bribes
 and  threats  -  of  a   hobbit  called   Baggins.  There   were  others
 beside  Harry  Goatleaf  in  the  room  tonight  who  were  there  for a
 purpose.  There   was  Bill   Ferney.  He   has  a   bad  name   in  the
 Bree-land,  and  queer  folk  call  at  his  house  sometimes.  You must
 have   noticed   him   among   the    company:   a    swarthy   sneering
 fellow.  He  was  very  close  with  one  of  the   southern  strangers,
 and  they  slipped  out  together  just  after  your  "accident".  Harry
 is  an  old  curmudgeon,  and  he  is  frightened;   but  he   won't  do
 anything,  unless  they  go  to  him.(5) Ferney is a different  matter -
 he  would  sell  anything  to  anybody;  or  make  mischief for  the fun
 of it.'                                                                
                                                                       
  From this point (Frodo's 'What will Ferney  sell?') the  text of  FR is
 largely achieved, as  far as  Trotter's question:  'Will you  have him?'
 Then follows:                                                          

   Frodo  made  no  answer.  He  looked  at  Trotter:  grim   and  wild
 and  rough-clad.  It was  hard to  know what  to do,  or to  feel sure
 of his good will. He had  been successful  in one  thing at  any rate:
 he  had  made  Frodo  suspect  everybody,   even  Mr   Butterbur.  And
 all  his  warnings  could  so  well  apply  to  himself.  Bill Ferney,
 Trotter:  which  was  the  most  likely  to   betray  them?   What  if
 Trotter  led  them  into  the  wild,  to  'some  dark  place  far from
 help'?  Everything  he  had  said   was  curiously   double-edged.  He
 had  a  dark  look,  and  yet  there  was something  in his  face that
 was strangely attractive.                                                
   The  silence  grew,  and  still  Frodo  found  no answer.  'There is
 one  obvious  question  you  have  not  put,'  said  Trotter  quietly.
 'You  have  not  asked  me:  "Who  told  you  to  look  out  for  us?"
 You  might  ask  that  before  you  decide  to  class  me   with  Bill
 Ferney.'                                                                 
   'I  am   sorry,'  stammered   Frodo;  but   at  that   moment  there
 came   a   knock   at   the   door.  Mr   Butterbur  was   there  with
 candles...                                                               
                                                                         
   The interruption  by Mr  Butterbur takes  place at  structurally the
 same point as in FR (p. 178), though the conversation he interrupts is
 quite different. Trotter now withdrew into a dark corner of  the room,
 and when Nob had  gone off  with the  hot water  to the  bedrooms, the
 landlord began thus:                                                     
                                                                         
   'I've  been  asked  to  look  out for  a party  of hobbits,  and for
 one by the name of Baggins in particular.'                               
   'What has that got to do with me, then?' asked Frodo warily.           
   'Ah!'   said   the  landlord   with  a   knowing  wink.   'You  know
 best;  but  old  Barnabas  can add  up two  and two,  if you  give him
 time.  Parties  out  of  the  Shire  don't  come here  often nowadays,
 but  I  was  told to  look out  for one  at just  about this  time. It
 would  be  queer,  if  there  was  no  connexion,  if  you  follow me.
 And  as  for  Baggins,  I've  heard  that  name  before. Mr  Bilbo was
 in  this  house  more  than  once,  and some  funny stories  have come
 out  of  the  Shire since  he went  off: vanished  with a  bang, while
 he  was speaking,  they say.  Not that  I believe  all the  tales that
 come  from  the  West  -  but  here  you  go  vanishing in  the middle
 of  a  song  by  all  accounts,  right  in  my  house. Maybe  you did,
 and  maybe  there  was  some  mistake,  but  it  set me  thinking. And
 when  I  have  time  to  scratch  my  head,  I  remember  noticing how
 your  friends  call  you  Frodo;  so  I  begin  to  wonder  if Baggins
 should not  come after  it.(6) For  it was  Frodo Baggins  I was  told to
                                                                         
                                                                         

                                
                                                                    
 look for; and I was given a description that fits well enough,  if I
 may say so.'                                                        
  'Indeed! Let's hear it then!'  said Frodo,  a little  impatient with
 the slow unravelling of Mr Butterbur's thoughts.                    
  'A  round-bellied  little  fellow  with  red  cheeks,'  answered the
 landlord  with  a grin.  'Begging your  pardon; but  he said  it, not
 me.' Folco [> Pippin] chuckled, but Sam looked angry.               
  'He said it? And who was he?' asked Frodo quickly.                 
  'Oh,  that   was  old   Gandalf,  if   you  know   who  I   mean.  A
 wizard  they  say  he  is, but  he is  a right  good friend  of mine,
 whether  or  no.  Many  a  good  turn  has he  done me.  "Barney," he
 says  to  me,  it  would  be a  matter of  a month  and more  ago, in
 August,(7) if I recollect  rightly, when  he came  in late  one evening.
 Very  tired  he  was,  and  uncommon thirsty.  "Barney," he  says, "I
 want  you  to  do  something  for  me."  "You've  only  to  name it,"
 said  I.  "I  want  you  to  look  out  for some  hobbits out  of the
 Shire,"  said he.  "There may  be a  couple, and  there may  be more.
 Nigh  the  end  of  September (8) it will be,  if they  come. I  hope I
 shall  be  with  them,  and  then  you'll  have  no  more to  do than
 draw some of your best ale for  us. But  if I'm  not with  them, they
 may  need  help. One  of them  will be  Frodo Baggins,  if it  is the
 right party: a great friend of mine, a round-bellied..." '          
  'All right!' said Frodo, laughing  in spite  of his  impatience. 'Go
 on! We've heard that already.'                                      
  Mr  Butterbur  paused,  put  out of  his stride.  'Where was  I?' he
 said. 'Ah  yes. "If  this Frodo  Baggins comes,"  said he,  "give him
 this";  and he  handed me  a letter.  "Keep it  safe and  secret, and
 keep  it in  your mind,  if your  head will  hold anything  so long,"
 says  he.  "And don't  you mention  all this  to anybody."  I've kept
 that letter by me night and day, since he gave it to me.'           
  'A  letter  for  me  from   Gandalf!'  interrupted   Frodo  eagerly.
 'Where is it?'                                                      
  'There   now!'   cried   Mr   Butterbur  triumphantly.   'You  don't
 deny  the  name!  Old  Barney  can  put  two  and  two  together. But
 it's a  pity you  did not  trust me  from the  beginning.' Out  of an
 inner pocket he brought a sealed letter and handed it to Frodo.(9)  
 On the outside it was inscribed: TO F. B. FROM G. ( )              
  'There's  another  thing  I  ought  to  say,'  Mr   Butterbur  began
 again.  'I  guess you  may be  in trouble,  seeing how  Gandalf isn't
 here, and they have come, as he warned me.'                         
  'What do you mean?' said Frodo.                                    
  'The  black  horsemen,'  said  Butterbur.  '  "If  you  see horsemen

                             
                                                                         
 in  black,"  says  Gandalf  to  me,  "look  out   for  trouble!   And  my
 friends  will  need  all  the  help   you  can   give."  And   they  have
 come,  sure  enough:  yesterday  and  the  day  before.(10) The   dogs  all
 yammered,  and  the  geese  screamed  at  them.   Uncanny,  I   call  it.
 They've  been  asking  for  news  of  a  hobbit  called Baggins,  I hear.
 And  that   Ranger,  Trotter,   he  has   been  asking   questions,  too.
 Tried to get in here, before you had had bite or sup, he did.'           
  'He   did!'   said   Trotter   suddenly,   coming   forward   into   the
 light.  'And  a lot  of trouble  would have  been saved,  if you  had let
 him in, Barnabas.'                                                       
  The   landlord   jumped   with  surprise.   'You!'  he   cried.  'You're
 always popping up. What do you want?'                                    
  'He's  here  with  my  leave,'  said  Frodo.   'He's  offering   us  his
 help.'                                                                   
  'Well,   you   know   best,   maybe,'   said   Mr   Butterbur,   looking
 doubtfully  at  Trotter.  'Of  course,  I  don't  know  what's  going on,
 or  what  these  black  fellows  want   with  you.   But  they   mean  no
 good to you, I'll swear.'                                                
  'They  mean  no   good  to   anyone,'  answered   Frodo.  'I   am  sorry
 I can't explain it all. I am tired  and very  worried, and  it is  a long
 tale.  But  tell  Gandalf  everything,  if he  turns up,  and he  will be
 very  grateful,  and  he  may  tell  you  more  than I  can. But  I ought
 at  least  to  warn  you  what  you   are  doing   in  helping   me.  The
 Black  Riders  are  hunting  me,   and  they   are  perilous.   They  are
 servants of the Necromancer.'                                            
  'Save  us!'  cried  Mr   Butterbur,  turning   pale.  'Uncanny   I  knew
 they  were;  but  that  is  the  worst  bit  of  news  that  has  come to
 Bree in my time! '                                                       
                                                                         
  This  version  now  attains  the  form  in  FR  (p.   181)  as   far  as
 Butterbur's departure to send  Nob out  to look  for Merry  with scarcely
 any deviation. Trotter speaks of 'the Shadow in the  South', not  'in the
 East', and refers of course to 'Mr Green', not 'Mr Underhill',  and after
 Butterbur's remark that there are others  in Bree  quicker in  the uptake
 than Nob is, he adds: 'Bill  Ferney was  here tonight,  and he's  an ugly
 customer.'  - It  will be  seen that  with the  structural change  in the
 ordering of the chapter (bringing the  landlord to  the hobbits'  room at
 a later point) the information about the Black Riders (itself very brief)
 is now given by Trotter, while Butterbur himself is left with only  a few
 words on the subject.(11) In previous  versions his  account of  the coming
 of the Riders to the inn door was  a chief  element in  the conversation;
 now there is no  mention of  it (though  it reappears  briefly in  FR, p.
 180).                                                                    
  In this version, the landlord before  leaving the  room asks  if Trotter

            
                                                                     
 is going to stay there, to which Trotter replies: 'I am. You may need
 me before the morning.' 'All right, then,' said the landlord,  'if Mr
 Green is willing.' When Butterbur has gone:                          
                                                                     
  'Well,  now  you  ought  to  guess  the  answer  to  the  question I
 spoke of  before he  came in,'  said Trotter.  'But aren't  you going
 to open the letter?'                                                 
  Frodo  looked  carefully  at  the  seal  before  he  broke   it.  It
 seemed certainly  to be  Gandalf's. Inside,  written in  the wizard's
 thin long-legged script,(12) was the  following   message.  Frodo
 read it aloud.(13)                                                   
                                                                     
  The   Prancing   Pony,   Bree,. Tuesday, September 12th.(14) Dear
  F.  I  am  starting  back  tomorrow,  6'  should reach  you in  a day
  or  two.  But  things  have   become  very   dangerous,  and   I  may
  not  get  through  in  time.  (He  has found  the Shire:  the borders
  are watched, and so am I.) If I  fail to  come, I  hope that  will be
  sufficient warning to you, @' you will have  sense to  leave Shire
  at once. If so, there is just a chance  you will  get through  as far
  as  Bree.  Look  out  for  horsemen  in  black.  They are  your worst
  enemies  (save  one):  they  are  Ringwraiths. Do  not use  It again:
  not  for  any  reason  at  all.  Do  not  move   in  the   dark.  Try
  and find  Trotter  the  ranger.  He will  be looking  out for  you: a
  lean,   dark,   weatherbeaten   fellow,  but   one  of   my  greatest
  friends.  He  knows  our  business.  He  will  see  you  through,  if
  any  one  can.  Make  for  Rivendell  as  fast  as   possible.  There
  I  hope  we  may  meet  again.  If  not,  Elrond  will   advise  you.
  Yours ..................... .                                       
    PS.   You   can   trust   Barnabas   Butterbur  and   Trotter.  But
  make  sure  it  is  really  Trotter.  The  real  Trotter will  have a
  sealed letter from me with these words in it                       
            All that is gold does not glitter,
            all that is long does not last,                                     
            All that is old does not wither,
            not all that is over is past.                                       
    PPS.  It  would  be  worse  than  useless  to  try  and  go beyond
  Bree  on  your  own.  If  Trotter  does  not  turn  up, you  must try
  and  get  Butterbur  to  hide   you  somewhere,   and  hope   that  I
  shall come.                                                         
    PPPS.  I  hope  B.  does  not  forget  this!  If  he  remembers  to
  give  it  to  you,  tell  him  I  am  very  grateful,  6'  still more
  surprised. Fare well wherever you fare. 35                          
                                                                     
  'Well, that is from Gandalf all right, quite apart from the         

 
                                                                   
 hand and the  signature,' said  Frodo as  he finished.  'What about
 your letter, Trotter?'                                             
    'Do  you need  it? I  thought you  had made  up your  mind about
 me already! If not,  you ought  not to  have let  me stay;  and you
 certainly ought not to have read that aloud to me.'                
    'I  haven't  made  up  my mind,'  said Sam  suddenly. 'And  I am
 not going  to see  Mr Frodo  made fun  of and  put upon.  Let's see
 that letter, or Sam Gamgee'll take a hand!'                       
    'My  good  Sam,'  said  Trotter.  'I've  got  a weapon  under my
 cloak, as well as you! And I don't mind telling you  that if  I was
 not the real Trotter, you would not  have a  chance, not  all three
 of you together. But steady there!' he said, as  Sam sprang  up. 'I
 have got a letter, and here it is!'                               
    Onto  the  table  he  tossed  another  sealed  letter, outwardly
 exactly like the other. Sam and Folco [> Pippin]  looked at  it, as
 Frodo  opened  it.  Inside  there  was a  small paper  in Gandalf's
 hand. It said:                                                     
                                                                   
                All that is gold does not glitter;                  
                all that is long does not last;                     
                All that is  old does  not wither;                  
                not all that is over is past.                       
    This is to certify that the bearer is Aragorn son of Celegorn,(15)
    of the line of Isildur Elendil's son, known in Bree as Trotter;
    enemy of the Nine, and friend of Gandalf. ...................: (X):-.
                                                                   
    Frodo  stared  at  the  words  in  amazement.  'Of  the  line of
 Elendil!' he said, looking with  awe at  Trotter. 'Then  It belongs
 to you as much as to me, or more!'                                 
    'It does not belong to either of us,' said Trotter; 'but you are
 to keep it for a while. For so it is ordained.'(16)                
    'Why didn't  you show  this to  us sooner?  It would  have saved
 time, and prevented me, and Sam, from behaving absurdly.'          
    'Absurdly! Not at all. Sam is  very sensible:  he doubted  me to
 the last, and I think he still does. Quite right, too! If you'd had
 more  experience  of  your  Enemy,  you  would  not trust  your own
 hands,  except  in broad  daylight, once  you knew  that he  was on
 your track. I had to make  sure of  you, too.  That was  one reason
 why I delayed.  The Enemy  has set  snares for  me before  now. But
 I must admit that I tried to persuade you to take  me as  a friend,
 for  my  own  sake  without  proofs.  A  hunted   wanderer  wearies
 sometimes of distrust, even while  he is  preaching it.(17) But there,
 I fear my looks are against me.'                                   

                         
                                                                    
   There follows the ill-judged intervention of Folco/Pippin - 'Hand-
 some is as handsome does we say  in the  Shire', which  had remained
 unchanged from Odo's original remark in VI.155; then follows:       
                                                                    
   Folco  [>  Pippin]  subsided;  but  Sam  was  not daunted,  and he
 still eyed  Trotter dubiously.  'You could  make yourself  look like
 you  do,  if you  were play-acting,'  he said.  'What proof  have we
 had that you are the real article, I should like to know?'          
   Trotter  laughed.  'Don't  forget  Butterbur's  letter, Sam!  ' he
 said.  'Think  it out!  Butterbur is  certainly the  real Butterbur,
 unless  the  whole of  Bree is  bewitched. How  could the  words all
 that  is  gold  appear  in  Butterbur's letter  and in  mine, unless
 Gandalf  wrote  them  both?  You  may  be   sure  Gandalf   did  not
 give  a spy  a chance  of knowing  that Butterbur's  letter existed.
 Even  if  he  did,  a  spy  could  not  know the  key-words, without
 reading  the  letter.  How  could  that   have  been   done  without
 Butterbur's knowledge?'                                             
   Sam scratched his  head long  and thoughtfully.  'Ah!' he  said at
 last. 'I dessay it would have  been difficult.  But how  about this:
 you could have done in the real Trotter and  stolen his  letter, and
 then  popped it  out, like  you did,  after hearing  Butterbur's and
 seeing  how  the land  lay? You  seem mighty  unwilling to  show it.
 What have you got to say to that?'                                  
   'I  say  you  are  a splendid  fellow,' said  Trotter. 'I  see why
 Gandalf  chose you  to go  with your  master. You  hang on  tight. I
 am afraid my only answer to you, Sam, is this: if  I had  killed the
 real  Trotter,  I  could  kill  you,  and I  should have  killed you
 already  without so  much talk.  If I  was after  the Ring,  I could
 have  it  -  now!  '  He  stood  up,  and  seemed  suddenly  to grow
 taller.  In his  face there  gleamed a  light, keen  and commanding.
 They did not move. Even Sam sat still, staring dumbly at him.       
   'But I am the real  Trotter, fortunately,'  he said,  looking down
 at  them  with  a  sudden  kindly  smile.  'I  am  Aragorn   son  of
 Celegorn, and if by life or  death I  can save  you, I  will.' There
 was a long silence.                                                 
   At  last  Frodo  spoke  hesitatingly.  'Did  those verses  of Gan-
 dalf's apply to you, then?' he asked. 'I thought at first  they were
 just nonsense.'                                                     
   'Nonsense,  if  you  will,' answered  Trotter. 'Don't  worry about
 them. They have served their turn.'                                 
   'If  you  want to  know,' said  Frodo, 'I  believed in  you before
 Butterbur came in. I  was not  trying to  trust you,  but struggling
 not  to  trust  you,  to   follow  your   own  teaching.   You  have

                                            
                                                                          
 frightened  me  several  times  tonight,  but  never   in  the   way  that
 servants  of  the  Enemy  would,  or  so  I  imagine.   I  think   one  of
 those  would...  would,  well,  seem  fairer   and  feel   fouler.  You...
 well, it is the other way round with you.'                                
  'I look foul  and feel  fair, is  it?' laughed  Trotter. 'We'll  leave it
 at that, and say no more about round bellies!'                            
  'I  am  glad  you  are  to  be  our  guide,'   said  Folco   [>  Pippin).
 'Now   that   we   are   beginning   to   understand   the    danger,   we
 should   be   in   despair   without   you.  But   somehow  I   feel  more
 hopeful than ever.'                                                       
  Sam said nothing.                                                        
                                                                          
  Afterwards  my  father   abandoned  this   spider's  web   of  argumenta-
 tion,  arising  from  there being  two letters  from Gandalf,  and handled
 the question of the verse of recognition All that is gold does not glitter
 and  Aragorn's  knowledge  of  it  extremely  adroitly  by  making Aragorn
 use the words himself (not having seen  or heard  Gandalf's one  letter) a
 propos  Frodo's  remark  (already  present  in  this version)  about 'foul
 and fair' (FR p. 184). But the  complication of  the two  letters survived
 the crucial  decision that  Gandalf's letter  to Frodo  was written  to be
 received by him  before he  left Bag  End and  failed in  delivery through
 Butterbur's forgetfulness.                                                
  After 'Sam said nothing' this version is the  same as  FR (p.  184), with
 Trotter's  words  about   the  leaving   of  Bree   and  the   making  for
 Weathertop.  But  his  answer  to  Frodo's   question  about   Gandalf  is
 much slighter:                                                            
                                                                          
  Trotter looked grave. 'I don't know,' he said. 'To tell you the          
 truth, I am very troubled about him - for the first time since I          
 have  known  him.  He  meant to  arrive here  with you  two days          
 sooner  than'  this.  We  should  at  least  have  had messages.          
 Something has happened. I think it is something that  he feared,          
 or he would not have taken all these precautions with letters.'           
                                                                          
 From  Frodo's  question  'Do  you  think  the  Black Riders  have anything
 to  do  with  it?'  the  remainder  of  FR  Chapter  10  was  now attained
 except in a few minor particulars, the  chief of  which occurs  in Merry's
 account  of  his  experience.  This  story  now  returns  to  the original
 version  (VI.161-2),  according   to  which   the  Rider   went  eastwards
 through the village and  stopped at  Bill Ferney's  house (whereas  in the
 'third phase' version, VI.353-4,  it went  in the  other direction  to the
 West-gate);  but  it  differs  from  FR (p.  185) in  that when  Merry was
 about to bolt back to the inn  'another black  shape rose  up before  me -
 coming down the  Road from  the other  gate -  and ...  and I  fell over.'
 In this version Trotter says: 'They may after all  try some  attack before

                                     
                                                                          
 we leave Bree. But it will be dark. In the light they need their horses.'(18)
  For the subsequent history of this chapter see pp. 76 - 8.               
                                                                          
                     Chapter XI: 'A Knife in the Dark'.                    
                                                                          
 This  chapter  was  another  of  those   that  my   father  at   this  time
 reconstituted partly from the existing 'third phase' text (the  latter part
 of Chapter  X and  the first  part of  Chapter XI,  see VI.359)  and partly
 from  new  manuscript  pages,  and as  with the  previous chapters  in this
 form  some  rejected  pages  of  the  older  version  became  separated and
 did not go to Marquette.                                                  
  The  new  text  opens  with  the  attack  on  Crickhollow, which  with the
 change  in  its  date had  been moved  from its  original place  in Chapter
 VII (see p. 36).  For the  previous form  of the  episode see  VI.328; this
 was almost identical to the original  text, VI.303  - 4.  To both  of these
 my father pencilled in glimpses  of the  story that  Odo left  with Gandalf
 as  he  rode  after the  Black Riders  - a  story that  seems only  to have
 entered  the  'third  phase'   narrative  when   the  'Bree'   chapter  was
 reached:  see  VI.336.  But  in  the  second  version  Crickhollow  was not
 empty: a curtain moved in a window - for Odo had stayed behind.           
  I give  first a  preliminary draft  of the  attack on  Crickhollow written
 for its new place in the story.                                           
                                                                          
  As  they  slept  there  in  the  inn  of  Bree, darkness  lay on         
 Buckland. Mist  strayed in  the dells  and along  the river-bank.         
 The  house  at Crickhollow  stood silent.  Not long  before, when         
 evening had just fallen, there had been  a light  in a  window. A         
 horse came quickly up the lane, and halted. Up the path  in haste         
 a figure walked, wrapped in a great cloak, leading a white horse.         
 He  tapped  on  the door,  and at  once the  light went  out. The         
 curtain  at  the  window  stirred,  and soon  after the  door was         
 opened  and  he  passed  quickly in.  Even as  the door  closed a         
 black  shadow  seemed  to  move  under  the  trees  and  pass out         
 through  the  gate  without  a   sound.(19) Then   darkness  slowly         
 deepened into night, a dead and misty night: no stars  shone over         
 Buckland.                                                                 
  There came the  soft fall  of hoofs,  horses were  drawing near,         
 led slow and cautiously.  The gate  in the  hedge opened,  and up         
 the  path  filed  three  shapes,  hooded,  swathed in  black, and         
 stooping low towards the  ground. One  went to  the door,  one to         
 each  corner  of  the house-end  on either  side; and  there they         
 stood, silent as  the black  shadows of  stones, while  time went         
 slowly on, and  the house  and the  trees about  it seemed  to be         
 waiting breathlessly.                                                     

                                     
                                                                         
  There was a faint stir in the leaves, and  a cock  crowed. The          
 cold  hour before  dawn had  come.(20) Suddenly  the figure  by the          
 door moved. In the dark, without star or  moon, the  blade that          
 was drawn gleamed,  as if  a chill  light had  been unsheathed.          
 There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered.                
  'Open  in  the  name  of  Sauron!'  said  a  voice,  cold  and          
 menacing. At a second blow the door yielded, and fell back with          
 its lock  broken and  timbers burst.  The black  figures passed          
 swiftly in.                                                              
  At that moment, nearby  among the  trees a  horn rang  out. It          
 rent the night like fire on a hill-top, echoing over  the land.          
 Awake!  Fear!  Fire!  Foes!  Awake!  Someone  was  blowing  the          
 Horn-call  of  Buckland,  which  had  not  been  sounded  for a          
 hundred  years, not  since the  white wolves  came in  the Fell          
 Winter  when  the Brandywine  was frozen.  Far away (21) answer-          
 ing  horns  were  heard.  Distant  sounds  of waking  and alarm          
 came through the night. The whole of Buckland was aroused.               
  The black shapes slipped swiftly from the  house. In  the lane          
 the sound of hoofs broke out,  and gathering  to a  gallop went          
 racing into the darkness. Behind them a white horse ran.  On it          
 sat an old man clad in grey, with long silver hair  and flowing          
 beard. His horn still sounded over hill and dale. In  his right          
 hand a wand flared and flickered like a sheaf of lightning.(22)          
 Behind him, clinging to his  cloak, sat  a hobbit.  Gandalf and          
 Hamilcar were riding to the  North Gate,  and the  Black Riders          
 fled before them. But they had  found out  what they  wished to          
 know: Crickhollow was empty and the Ring had gone.                       
                                                                         
  The  story here  must be  that Gandalf  and Hamilcar  left the  house by
 the back door, as Fredegar Bolger  did in  FR (p.  188), but  then waited
 among the  trees surrounding  the open  space in  which the  house stood.
 A note added to the time-scheme B (p. 11) seems to fit this version: 'The
 Black  Riders  creep into  Buckland, but  too late  to see  Frodo depart.
 They  track  him  to  Crickhollow and  guard it,  and see  Gandalf enter.
 But  Gandalf  (and  Ham pretending  to be  Frodo) burst  out on  night of
 Sept. 29.'                                                               
  Another short  text, written  on the  same slip  of paper  and obviously
 at  the  same  time  as that  just given,  provided only  the end  of the
 episode; and in this text, which was  later struck  through, there  is no
 mention of Gandalf:                                                      
                                                                         
 Ham Bolger was blowing the Horn-call of Buckland,  which had             
 not been sounded for a hundred years... [@ c. as before] The             
 black shapes slipped swiftly from the house.                             

 
                                                                         
   In  the  lane  the  sound  of  hoofs  broke  out  and  gathering  to  a
 gallop   raced   off   madly   northwards  into   the  dark.   The  black
 riders  had fled,  for their  concern was  not yet  with the  little folk
 of  the  Shire,  but  only  with  the  Ring.  And  they   had  discovered
 what   they   wished   to   know:   Crickhollow   was   empty   and   the
 Ring had gone.                                                           
                                                                         
   This perhaps goes with the  outline $4  on p.  9: 'Crickhollow  scene -
 only Hamilcar there. He blows horn...'                                   
   The  version  of the  story that  appears in  the 'fourth  phase' manu-
 script changes again. It begins thus:                                    
                                                                         
   As they slept there  in the  inn at  Bree, darkness  lay on            
 Buckland: mist strayed in the dells and along the river-bank.            
 The house at Crickhollow stood silent. A curtain stirred in a            
 window and for a moment a light gleamed out. At once  a black            
 shadow moved under the trees and passed out through  the gate            
 without a sound. The night deepened. There came the soft fall            
 of hoofs...                                                              
                                                                         
   The draft text given on p. 53 is then followed  closely; but  from 'The
 black figures passed swiftly in' there is a new story:                   
                                                                         
 The  black  figures  passed  swiftly  in.  In  a  moment  they  came  out
 again;  one  was  carrying  a  small  bundled  figure  in  an  old cloak:
 it  did  not  struggle.  Now  they  leaped  upon  their   horses  without
 caution;  in  the  lane  the  noise  of  hoofs  broke out,  and gathering
 to a gallop went hammering away into the darkness.                       
   At  the  same  moment,  [struck   out:  from   the  direction   of  the
 Ferry,]   another   horse  came   thundering  along   the  lane.   As  it
 passed  the  gate  a horn rang out.(23) It rent the night like fire  on a
 hill-top...   [@ c.   as   before]   Far   away   answering   horns  were
 heard; the alarm was spreading. Buckland was aroused.                    
   But  the  Black  Riders  rode  like  a  gale  to  the  North  Gate. Let
 the  little  people  blow!  Sauron  would  deal with  them later.  In the
 meanwhile  they  had  earned   his  thanks:   Baggins  was   caught  like
 a  fox  in  a  hole.  They  rode  down  the  watchmen,  leaped  the gate,
 and vanished.                                                            
   And  that  is  how  Hamilcar  Bolger   first  crossed   the  Brandywine
 Bridge.                                                                  
                                                                         
   This  version evidently  belongs with  the story  in the  time-scheme D
 (p.  12),  where  on  September  29  'the  Riders attack  Crickhollow and
 carry off Ham, pursued by Gandalf' -  although there  this took  place at
 midnight,  whereas  here  it  was  'the cold  hour before  dawn'. Gandalf
 arrived just too late, and (and as will appear later) thought that it was

                          
                                                                         
 Frodo  who  had  been  taken; but  the further  story of  Hamilcar Bolger
 must be briefly postponed (see pp. 68 ff.).                              
                                                                         
    Frodo's  'dream  of  the  tower' had  been removed  from the  night at
 Bree to the night at Crickhollow (see pp. 33 - 6), and his sleep  at Bree
 is now described as it is  in FR:  'his dreams  were again  troubled with
 the noise of wind and  of galloping  hoofs ...  far off  he heard  a horn
 blowing wildly.'                                                         
    New  writing  (i.e.  replacement  of  the  'third  phase'  manuscript)
 continues as far as the departure of the hobbits  with Trotter  from Bree
 and their coming into open country. At this stage Folco was  still Folco,
 not Pippin; but the text of  FR (pp.  189 -  93) was  reached in  all but
 trifling  details.(24) The  later  story  of  Merry's  ponies  now  appears,
 changed  from  the  earlier  (VI.164)  in  which  Tom  Bombadil,  when he
 found them, went to the  inn at  Bree to  find out  what had  happened to
 the  hobbits,  and  paid Mr  Butterbur for  the ponies;  the relationship
 between Bombadil and Butterbur had been abandoned (pp. 10, 37).          
    From  the  point  where  the  companions  saw  the houses  and hobbit-
 holes of Staddle on their left (FR p. 193)  the 'third  phase' manuscript
 was retained, and lightly corrected, as  far as  the arrival  of Trotter,
 Frodo,  and  Merry  on  the  summit  of  Weathertop.  As  the  manuscript
 stood at this stage the text  of FR  was very  nearly attained,  but some
 additions were later: such as the lights  in the  eastward sky  seen from
 the  Midgewater  Marshes,  the  burnt  turf and  blackened stones  on the
 summit  of  Weathertop,  and  the  ring  of  ancient stonework  about it;
 apparently the alteration of Trotter's remark that  'not all  the rangers
 are to be trusted, nor all the birds and beasts', which goes back  to the
 original form of the  story (VI.167),  to 'not  all the  birds are  to be
 trusted, and there are other spies more evil  than they  are' was  also a
 much  later  change.  Strider's  account  in  FR  (p.  197) of  the great
 watchtower  on  Weathertop   and  its   ruin  is   not  entered   on  the
 manuscript  at  all,  an  J  the  text  remains  here unchanged  from its
 earliest  form  (VI.169,  355). Sam's  song of  Gil-galad was  written at
 this time, and entered into the manuscript.(25)                              
    On  the  summit  of  Weathertop  the  old  story  underwent  an impor-
 tant  change.  Gandalf's  message  on  a  paper  that fluttered  from the
 cairn of stones (VI.170, 355) has gone, and the  text of  FR (p.  199) is
 reached (without, as already noted, any mention of a  fire: the  stone on
 which  the  marks  were  found  was  not  'flatter  than the  others, and
 whiter, as if it had escaped the fire', but 'smaller than the others, and
 of different colour, as if it had been rubbed  clean'). The  scratches on
 the  stone  were  X:  IIII  (the  Old English  G-rune still  being used),
 interpreted  to  mean  that  Gandalf  had  been there  on 4  October. The
 marks  were  however  changed to  read X:  I.III, and  a new  passage was
 inserted (and subsequently rejected):                                    
                                                                         
        'But there's a dot between the first 1 and the next three,' said

 Sam poring over the stone. 'It doesn't say G.4, but G.1.3.'              
   'Quite   right!'   agreed   Trotter.  'Then   if  Gandalf   made  these
 marks,  it  might mean  that he  was here  from the  first to  the third;
 or perhaps that he and another were here on the third.'                  
                                                                         
 This is odd, because Sam stayed down in  the dell  and did  not go  up to
 the  summit  of  Weathertop;  moreover  this  inserted  discussion  takes
 place  at  the summit,  so that  it is  no help  to suppose  that Trotter
 brought the stone down  with him  to the  dell. -  Later, the  marks were
 changed again to X:III.                                                  
   To Frodo's 'It would be  a great  comfort to  know that  he was  on the
 way to Rivendell' Trotter replies simply:  'It would  indeed! But  in any
 case, as he is not here himself, we must look  after ourselves,  and make
 our  own  way  to  Rivendell  as  best  we  can.'  In  answer  to Merry's
 question 'How far is Rivendell?' Trotter at first replied very much as in
 the original version (VI.171), but distinguished  between three  weeks in
 fair  weather  and  a  month in  foul weather  from Brandywine  Bridge to
 the  Ford,  and  concludes:  'So we  have at  least twelve  days' journey
 before us,(26) and very likely  a fortnight  or more.'  This was  rejected in
 the  act of  writing and  the text  of FR  substituted, in  which Trotter
 states  the  time it  took from  Weathertop to  the Ford  without comput-
 ing it so elaborately: 'twelve  days from  here to  the Ford  of Bruinen,
 where the Road crosses the Loudwater that runs out of Rivendell.'        
   In  the  'third  phase'  the  chapter  ended  with Trotter,  Frodo, and
 Merry  slipping  down  from  the  summit,  and  the  next  chapter  began
 with 'Sam and Folco had not been idle' (in the dell). In the  new version
 the chapter continues,  and as  in FR  includes the  attack by  the Black
 Riders.  The  passage  opens exactly  as in  FR (p.  201), and  Gandalf s
 supplies  of  cram,  bacon,  and  dried  fruits  (VI.357) have  gone, but
 Trotter  has  different  things  to  report from  his examination  of the
 tracks in the dell, and he does not  assert that  Rangers had  been there
 recently, and that it was they who had left the firewood.                
                                                                         
   'It  is  just  as  I  feared,'  he  said  when he  came back.  'Sam and
 Folco  [)  Pippin]  have  trampled  the  soft   ground,  and   the  marks
 are  spoilt  or  confused.  There  has  been   somebody  here   in  boots
 lately,  which  means  somebody  who  is  not  a  Ranger,  but   that  is
 all I can say for certain.  But I  don't quite  like it:  it looks  as if
 there  had  been  more  than  one  pair  of  boots.'   To  each   of  the
 hobbits   there   came   the   thought   of   the   cloaked   and  booted
 riders.  If  they  had  already  found  the  dell,  the   sooner  Trotter
 took   them   somewhere   else   the  better.   But  Trotter   was  still
 considering the meaning of the footprints.                               
   'There  was  also  something  even  more  strange,'  he  went   on:  'I
 think  there  are  hobbit-tracks,  too:  only  I can't  now be  sure that

                                        
                                                                           
 there is a third set, different from Folco's [>  Pippin's] and             
 Sam's.'                                                                    
  'But there aren't any hobbits in this part of the  world, are             
 there?' said Merry.                                                        
  'There are four here  now,' answered  Trotter, 'and  one more             
 can't be called impossible; but I have no idea what that would             
 mean.'                                                                     
  'It might mean  that these  black fellows  have got  the poor             
 wretch as a prisoner,' said Sam. He viewed the bare  dell with             
 great dislike...                                                           
                                                                           
 Sam's  remark  is  of  course  a mere  surmise, and  he speaks  without any
 particular   reference:   boots  and   hobbit-tracks  merely   suggest  the
 possibility  that  the Riders  might have  a hobbit  with them.  But though
 Trotter's  remarks  are  inconclusive,  and  within  the  narrative  inten-
 tionally so, it is obvious that the  story of  Hamilcar Bolger's  ride with
 Gandalf is present here.                                                   
  Merry's  question  to  Trotter  beginning  'Can   the  Riders   see?'  now
 takes the same form as in FR (p. 202), and Trotter's  reply is  similar but
 less elaborate.(29)                                                        
  In this text,  as noted  above, Trotter  does not  say anything  about its
 being a Rangers' camp in the dell,  and the  firewood is  left unexplained.
 Where in FR he says simply: 'Let us take this  wood that  is set  ready for
 the fire as a sign', here he adds: 'Whoever left it, brought it and  put it
 here for a purpose; for there are no trees near. Either he meant to return,
 or thought that friends in need might follow him.  There is  little shelter
 or defence here, but fire will make up for both. Fire is our friend  in the
 wilderness.'(30)                                                           
  The  passage  in  the  previous  version  (VI.358)   describing  Trotter's
 tales as they sat by the fire in the dell was  changed, presumably  at this
 time,  to its  reduced form  in FR  (p. 203);  and his  story of  Beren and
 Luthien now appears in the form that it has in FR (pp. 205  - 6).  The song
 itself is missing; but the final form was apparently achieved at this time,
 since it is found  written out  roughly but  in finished  composition among
 draft papers of this period.(31)                                         
                                                                           
                      Chapter XII: 'Flight to the Ford'.                     
                                                                           
 This chapter was constituted from  the existing  text, with  replacement of
 some  pages;  but  in  this case  the whole  manuscript was  kept together.
 Folco is still Folco in the passages of new writing,  but was  corrected to
 Pippin or Peregrin throughout.                                             
  The  River  Hoarwell  or  Mitheithel,  and  the  Last  Bridge,   have  now
 emerged,  and   the  Ettenmoors   and  Ettendales (32) of  FR   (the  Dimrill-
 dale(s) of the 'third phase')  are now  the Entish  Lands and  Entish Dales

                                                                
                                                                                    
 (see  p.  10  and  note  14,  and  p.  14  and  note  18).  The  'Riven   River'  or
 'Rivendell  River'  of  the  'third  phase'  (VI.360)  is   now  the   Loudwater  or
 Bruinen   (note  27);   and  Trotter   tells  his   companions  that   the  Hoarwell
 joins  the  Loudwater  away  in  the  South:  'Some  call  it  the  Greyflood  after
 that' (FR p. 212).                                                                  
   Trotter  finds  the  elf-stone  in   the  mud   on  the   Last  Bridge;   but  the
 passage  in  which  he   speaks  of   the  country   to  the   north  of   the  Road
 remains virtually as it  was in  the earliest  form of  the story  (VI.192 -  3; cf.
 FR  p.  214):  he  does  not  say  that  he  once  dwelt   in  Rivendell,   and  the
 history   of   Angmar   and   the   North   Kingdom   had   not  emerged   (cf.  pp.
 37, 56).                                                                            
   The  removal  of  the   names  'Bert'   and  'William'   from  the   Stone  Trolls
 was  also  a  later  decision;  but  it  was  now  that   Sam's  'Troll   Song'  was
 introduced   (after   some   hesitation).   My   father's  original   intention  had
 been  to  have  Bingo  sing  it  at  The  Prancing  Pony   (see  VI.142,   notes  11
 and   12),   and   he   had   made   a   rough,   uncompleted   version   for   that
 occasion,   developed   and   much   changed   from   the   original    Leeds   song
 The Root of the Boot of the 1920s (given in Vol. VI, see pp. 142 - 4).(33)          
   The  'Troll  Song'  is  found  here  in  three  distinct  and   carefully  written
 versions,   beside   much   rough   working;   the  third   version  was   taken  up
 into  the  manuscript.  The  'Bree'  version,  which  I  did not  print in  Vol. VI,
 was  already  much  closer  to  the  first  of  these  than  to  The  Root   of  the
 Boot,  from  which  my  father  rejected  all   such  references   as  'churchyard',
 'aureole',  'wore  black  on a  Sunday', etc.  I give  the first  text here,  in the
 form  in  which  it  was  written  out  fair  in  ink;  there  are   many  pencilled
 variants,   here   ignored.   For   the   development  of   the  second   and  third
 versions see note 35.                                                               
   In   The   Root   of  the   Boot  the   Troll's  opponent   was  named   Tom,  and
 his  uncle  John;  in  the  'Bree'  version  he  was  John,   and  his   uncle  Jim,
 with   John   changed   back  to   Tom  while   the  text   was  being   worked  on.
 In  all  three  of  the present  texts the  names are  John and  Jim, as  they still
 were   when   my   father   sang  the   song  to   Mr  and   Mrs  George   Sayer  at
 Malvern in 1952;(34) in FR they are Tom and his uncle Tim.                              
                                                                                    
          A troll sat alone on his seat of stone,                                    
                 And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;                            
                  For many a year he had gnawed it near,                             
               And sat there hard and hungry.                                        
                          Tongue dry! Wrung dry!                                     
                  For many a year he had gnawed it near                              
                     And sat there hard and hungry.                                  
                                                                                    
                Then up came John with his big boots on.                             
          Said he to the troll: 'Pray, what is yon?                                  
            For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Jim,                             
               As went to walk on the mountain.                                     
                    Huntin'! Countin'!                                               

                                         
                                                     
      It looks like the shin o' my nuncle Jim,        
        As went to walk on the mountain.'           
                                                     
 'My  lad,' said  the troll,  'this bone  I stole;
 But what be bones that lie in a hole?              
 Thy nuncle were dead as a lump o' lead,             
    Before I found his carkis.                        
         Hark'ee! Mark'ee!                            
 Thy nuncle were dead as a lump o' lead,              
    Before I found his carkis.'                       
                                                     
 Said John: I doan t see why the likes o thee         
 Without axin' leave should go makin' free            
 With the leg or the shin o' my kith and my kin,      
    So hand the old bone over!                        
          Rover! Trover!                              
 So give me the shin o' my kith and my kin,           
    And hand the old bone over!'                      
                                                     
 'For a couple o' pins,' says the troll, and grins,
 'I'll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins.              
 A bit o' fresh meat will go down sweet,              
   And thee shall join thy nuncle!                    
        Sunk well! Drunk well!                       
 A bit o' fresh meat u ill go down sweet,            
   And thee shall join thy nuncle.'                   
                                                     
 But just as he thought his dinner was caught,      
 He found his hands had hold of naught;               
 But he caught a kick both hard and quick,            
        For John had slipped behind him.              
              Mind him! Blind him!                    
     He caught a kick both hard and quick,            
        For John had slipped behind him.              
                                                     
 The troll tumbled down, and he cracked his crown;
 But John went hobbling back to town,                 
 For that stony seat was too hard for feet,           
   And boot and toe u ere broken.                     
        Token! Spoken!                                
   That stony seat was too hard for feet,             
       And boot and toe were broken.                  
                                                     
 There the troll lies, no more to rise,               
 With his nose to earth and his seat to the skies;
         But under the stone is a bare old bone       
   That u as stole by a troll from its owner.         
        Donor! Boner!                                 

                                                           
                                                                          
      Under the stone lies a broken bone.                                  
                  That was stole by a troll from its owner.(35)           
                                                                          
  At  the  end  of  the  recital  Frodo  says  of  Sam:  'First  he   was  a
 conspirator, now he's a jester. He'll end up by  becoming a  wizard -  or a
 toad!'  -  The  stone  that  marked the  place where  the trolls'  gold was
 hidden is still marked with Old English G and B runes in a circle,  and the
 text remains as in the 'third phase' (VI.360).                            
  Glorfindel now  hails Trotter,  not as  in the  previous version  with Ai,
 Du-finnion!  but  with  Ai, dennad  Torfir! A  short preparatory  draft for
 the  passage  beginning  with  Glorfindel's greeting  to Frodo  (VI.361, FR
 p. 222) is found, as follows:                                             
                                                                          
  'Hail, and well met at last! '  said the  elf-lord to  Frodo. 'I  was sent
  from  Rivendell  to  look  for  your  coming.  Gandalf  feared   that  you
  might follow the Road to the Ford.'                                      
  'Gandalf has reached Rivendell then?' cried Frodo joyfully.              
  'More  than  five  days  ago,' answered  Glorfindel. 'He  rode out  of the
  Entish Dales over the Hoarwell springs.'                                 
  'Out of the Entish Dales!' exclaimed Trotter.                           
  'Yes,'  said  Glorfindel,  'and  we  thought  you  might  come that  way to
  avoid  the  peril of  the Road.  Some are  seeking you  in that  region. I
  alone have come this way. I rode as far as the Bridge of                 
                                                                          
 Here  the  text  breaks  off.  That  Glorfindel should  have set  out after
 Gandalf  reached Rivendell  is at  variance with  the time-schemes  (p. 14)
 and  this  brief  draft  must  have  preceded   them.  Abandoned   in  mid-
 sentence, it was replaced  by another  very close  to what  Glorfindel says
 in  FR:  he  had  left  Rivendell nine  days before;  Gandalf had  not then
 come;  and  Elrond  had  sent  out  from  Rivendell   not  on   account  of
 Gandalf  but  because  he  had  had news  from Gildor's  people -  'some of
 our  kindred  journeying  beyond  the  Branduin  (which  you   turned  into
 Brandywine)'.  This  was  taken  up  into  the  manuscript  of  the chapter
 (without  the  reference to  the hobbits'  name for  the river:  the moment
 was too urgent for such reflections).(36) It may  be that  this change  in the
 story  came  about  from  the  consideration  that  too  little   time  was
 allowed   for  Gandalf's   great  detour   northward  through   the  Entish
 Dales.                                                                    
  In any case, the time-scheme D reflects the revised text:  Glorfindel left
 Rivendell  on  9  October  and  found  Trotter  and  the hobbits  nine days
 later,  on  the   18th,  while   Gandalf  and   Ham  Bolger   only  reached
 Rivendell  on  that  same  day,   having  taken   a  full   fortnight  from
 Weathertop.                                                               
  In  the  new  version,   Sam's  protective   fierceness  when   Frodo  was
 attacked by pain and swayed  is more  bitterly expressed:  ' "My  master is
 sick  and  wounded,  though  perhaps  Mr  Trotter has  not told  you that,"
 said Sam angrily.' Much later, the latter part of this was struck out.

                               
                                                                            
      At  the  end  of  the  chapter  the three  Riders who  came out  of the
  tree-hung  cutting  become,  by  correction  to  the  existing  manuscript,
  five,  and  the six  who came  from ambush  away to  the left  become four.
  This change goes of course with the change of three Riders  to five  in the
  attack on Weathertop (see note 31).                                        
                                                                            
                                     NOTES.                                  
                                                                            
     1.  In the draft A there is also a rejected version of the words between
         the Rider and the gatekeeper:                                       
            'Have you seen Gandalf?' said the voice after a pause.           
            'No sir, not since midsummer,' said Harry.                       
            'You will watch for him,' said the voice slowly. 'You will       
         watch for hobbits. We want Baggins. He is with them....'            
     2.  In the fair copy B of the end of Chapter V (pp. 34-5); in the draft
         A (p. 32) the name is still Folco.                                  
     3.  'nigh on a score of years back' refers to Bilbo's passage through
         Bree after his Farewell Party, on his way to Rivendell. Butterbur
         had therefore seen Bilbo since he 'vanished with a bang while he
         was speaking', as the landlord goes on to say. See p. 83.           
     4.  This development, showing the Riders to be well informed about      
         the Bagginses of Bag End, was not retained.                         
     5.  On Trotter's references to Harry Goatleaf see pp. 41 - 2.           
     6.  This speech of Butterbur's is largely derived from the draft text A
         (p. 43), where however it stands in a different context: there, it
         was on account of the questions of the Black Riders at the inn      
         door, whereas here Butterbur has not mentioned the Riders.          
     7.  'a month' was corrected to 'a fortnight', and at the same time 'in
         August' was struck out. The date on Gandalf's letter (p. 49) is     
         12 September, showing that these changes were made while the        
         chapter was in progress.                                            
     8.  'September' was corrected to 'this month'; see note 7.              
     9.  The relations between the versions in respect of Gandalf's letter
         are:                                                                
          'Third phase' o f the 'Bree' chapter:                              
          Butterbur tells Frodo of Gandalf's visit two days before, and of
         his message to hurry on after him (VI.338 - 9)                      
          Trotter has the letter from Gandalf (VI.343)                       
                                                                            
            Draft revision A of the 'third phase' version:                   
            Butterbur has nothing to communicate from Gandalf, who has       
            not recently been in Bree (p. 43)                                
          Trotter has the letter from Gandalf (p. 44)                        
                                                                            
            The present text:                                                
            Butterbur tells Frodo of Gandalf's  visit to  Bree (in  August >)
            on 12 September (p. 47 and note 7)                               

                  
                                                                            
       Butterbur has the letter from Gandalf (p. 47)                         
                                                                            
      The Fellowship of the Ring:                                            
       Butterbur  tells  Frodo  of  Gandalf's  visit  at  the  end  of  June,
      leaving  with  the  landlord  a  letter  to  be  taken  to  the  Shire,
      which was not done (p. 179).                                           
  10. 'yesterday  and  the  day  before':  i.e.  Tuesday  and  Wednesday,  27
      and  28  September.  Similarly  in  A  the  first Rider  passed through
      Bree on the Tuesday (p. 43),  not as  in the  previous versions  on the
      Monday  (VI.151,  339).  In  FR  (pp.  176,  180) the  first appearance
      of the Black Riders in Bree was again on Monday the 26th.              
  11. This is in fact a reversion to the alternative text 'B' of the original
      'Bree'  chapter  (see  VI.159),  where  Butterbur  does  not  encounter
      the Riders and has nothing to say about them.                          
  12. 'thin  long-legged  script': 'strong  but graceful  script' FR.  In the
      earlier versions Gandalf's handwriting is 'trailing' (VI.154, 352).     
  13. There  are  two  very  rough draft  versions of  the letter.  The first
      reads:                                                                 
        The   Prancing  Pony   Aug.  30.   Tuesday.  Dear   F.  I   hope  you
      will not need this.  If you  get this  (I hope  old Butterbur  will not
      forget) things  will be  far from  well. I  hope to  get back  in time,
      but  things  have  happened  which  make  it   doubtful.  This   is  to
      say:  look  out  for  horsemen  in  black.  Avoid  them:  they  are our
      worst  enemies  (save  one).  Don't use  It again,  not for  any reason
      whatever.  Make  for  Rivendell  as  fast  as  you  possibly  can;  but
      don't  move  in the  dark. I  hope, if  you reach  Bree, you  will meet
      Trotter  the  Ranger:  a  dark   rather  lean   weather-beaten  fellow,
      but  my  great  friend,  and  enemy  of  our  enemies.  He   knows  all
      our  business.  He  has  been   watching  the   east  borders   of  the
      Shire  since  April,  but  for  the  moment  has  disappeared.  You can
      trust  him:  he  will see  you through  if it  can be  done. I  hope we
      may  meet  in  Rivendell. If  not Elrond  will advise  you. If  I don't
      come  I  can  only  hope  that  will  be  sufficient  warning  for you,
      and  that  you  (and  Sam,  too,  at  least)  will  leave the  Shire as
      soon as possible.                                                      
      The  other draft  is the  very close  forerunner of  the letter  in the
      present  manuscript,  and  scarcely differs  from it,  but it  bears no
      date. - For previous forms of the letter see VI.154, 158, 352.         
  14. On  the date  12 September  (beside 30  August in  the draft,  note 13)
      see notes 7 and 8.                                                     
  15. 'Aragorn  son  of  Celegorn' is  certainly later  than 'Aragorn  son of
      Aramir' (p. 7). - The original form  of the  name of  the third  son of
      Feanor  was  Celegorm,  but  this  was  changed  to  Celegorn   in  the
      course  of  the  writing  of  the  Quenta  Silmarillion  (V.226,  289).
      Later it became Celegorm again.                                        
  16. These  words  of  Frodo  and  Aragorn  were  afterwards  used  in  'The
      Council of Elrond' (see p. 105, note 3).                               

                                                          
                                                                         
  17. There is much  initial drafting  in exceedingly  rough form  for this
      part of the chapter. The first form of this passage was:            
        The  Enemy  has  set  snares  for me  before now.  Of course  I did
      not  really  doubt  you  after  seeing  you  with  Tom  Bombadil, and
      certainly not after  hearing Frodo's  song. Bilbo  wrote that,  and I
      don't   see   how  servants   of  the   Enemy  could   possibly  have
      known  it.  But  I had  to teach  you caution  and convince  you that
      I was personally to  be trusted  all the  same -  so that  you should
      have no  doubts or  regrets later.  Also a  wanderer, an  old ranger,
      had a desire  to be  taken as  a friend  for his  own sake  for once,
      and without proofs.                                                 
      For the origin of this speech of Trotter's see VI.155.              
  18. With 'In the light  they need  their horses'  cf. Strider's  words on
      Weathertop (FR  p. 202):  the black  horses can  see, and  the Riders
      can use men and other creatures as spies'; for earlier forms  of this
      see VI.178, 357, and p. 58 and note 29.                             
  19. I take the significance  of this  to be  that the  one Rider  who had
      stood sentinel under the trees went to fetch the other two.         
  20. These  two sentences  replaced, soon  after the  time of  writing, 'A
      curtain in one of the windows moved' (cf. VI.328).                  
  21. 'Far  away  answering  horns were  heard': in  all the  variant forms
      of the 'Crickhollow episode' the reading  is 'Far  away' (adverbial).
      The  reading  of  FR  (p.  189),  'Far-away answering  horns' (adjec-
      tival), which appears already in  the first  impression of  the first
      edition, is I think an early error.                                 
  22. The  expression  a  sheaf of  lightning, going  back to  the earliest
      form  of  the  episode  (VI.304),  seems  not  to  be  recorded.  The
      Oxford  English Dictionary  gives a  meaning of  sheaf 'a  cluster of
      jets of fire or water darting up together', with quotations  from the
      nineteenth century, but I  doubt that  this is  relevant. Conceivably
      my father had in mind a 'cluster' or 'bundle' of lightnings',  like a
      'sheaf of arrows'.                                                  
  23. These  sentences  (from  'At  the  same  moment...') were  a replace-
      ment,  made  as  I  think  at  or  very  soon   after  the   time  of
      composition, of 'Nearby among the trees a horn rang out.'           
  24. Some corrections made to attain it  were put  in subsequently,  as is
      seen at once from the fact that in one of them  'Pippin' is  the name
      written,  not  changed  from  'Folco';  but  I  doubt that  they were
      much later, and the question has here no importance.                
  25. The original workings  of Sam's  song of  Gil-galad are  extant, with
      the original form of the dialogue that followed his recital:        
           The  others  turned  in  amazement,  for  the  voice  was Sam's.
      'Don't stop! ' said Folco.                                          
           'That's all I know, sir,' stammered Sam blushing. 'I  learned it
      out of an old book up  at Mr.  Bilbo's, when  I was  a lad.  I always
      was as  one for  elves: but  I never  knew what  that bit  was about,

                                     
                                                                           
      until  I  heard  Gandalf  talking.  Mr.  Frodo'll  remember  that day.'
      'I  do,'  said  Frodo;  'and  I  know  the   book.  I   often  wondered
      where it came from, though I never read it carefully.'                
         'It came from Rivendell,' said Trotter. 'That is part of           
      Here  the  text  breaks  up into  a mass  of rough  variants, including
      'It  comes from  "The Fall  of Gilgalad",  which is  in an  old tongue.
      Bilbo  must  have  been  translating  it',  and  'I  know the  book you
      mean  (said  Frodo).  Bilbo  wrote  his  poems  in  it.  But   I  never
      thought of them as true.'                                             
  26. 'at least twelve days' journey before us': i.e. 21 less  9 (2  from the
      Brandywine Bridge to Bree, 7 from Bree to Weathertop).                
  27. Bruinen  occurs  in  the  time-scheme  D,  p.  14; Loudwater  is first
      met  here  (but  is found  also on  one of  the sketch-maps  redrawn in
      VI.201).                                                              
  28. In   draft   fragments  there   are  many   versions  of   the  passage
      concerning   the   problem   of   provisions   that   now   beset   the
      travellers,  and  in  these there  are still  several mentions  of 'the
      additional supplies left by Gandalf.'                                 
  29. The  passage  in  the  final  form  'but  our  shapes  cast  shadows in
      their  minds... they  smell the  blood of  living things,  desiring and
      hating it' is lacking. The final text is found in this  manuscript, but
      whether added at this time or later I cannot say.                     
  30. Aragorn's  remark  in  FR  about  the  Riders  and  fire  ('Sauron  can
      put fire to his  evil uses...')  was added  to the  manuscript. -  In a
      draft  for  the earlier  passage where  he examines  the traces  in the
      dell he says:                                                         
         'The  wood  is  interesting.  It  is  beech. There  are no  trees of
      that  sort  for  many  miles  from   this  place,   so  the   wood  was
      brought  from  a  distance.  It  must  have  been  hidden  here  for  a
      purpose:  that  is,  either  the campers  meant to  stay or  to return,
      or they thought friends were likely to follow.'                       
  31. Two  differences  from  FR  that  remained  in  the 'third  phase' were
      corrected  on  this  manuscript:  'three tall  figures' to  'five', and
      Frodo's cry to 0 Elbereth! Gilthoniel! (see VI.358).                  
  32. The   Ettenmoors   and   Ettendales   of   FR   (pp.  212,   215)  were
      written  into  this  manuscript,  but  certainly at  some later  time -
      replacing  Entish  Lands  and  Entish  Dales  when  the  word  Ent  had
      acquired  its  special  meaning.  It  may  be  that  Etten-   from  Old
      English  eoten  'giant,  troll'  (Grendel  in  Beowulf  was  an eoten),
      Middle  English  eten,  was first  devised on  this manuscript,  in the
      passage  where  Trotter  says  'If  we  keep  on  as  we  are  going we
      shall  get  up  into  the  Entish  Dales  far  north of  Rivendell' (FR
      p.  215),  for  my  father  wrote  here  Thirs  before he  wrote Etten-
      dales.  He  must  have  been  thinking  of using  the Old  English word
      pyrs,  of  the  same  general  meaning  as  ent, eoten,  Middle English
      thirs  (and  other  forms).  On  the  other  hand a  note on  the First

       Map (see  p. 306)  seems also  to show  Etten- at  the moment  of its
       emergence.                                                           
  33.  There  was also  a fleeting  idea that  it would  be Bilbo's  song at
       Rivendell (see VI.412, note 6).                                      
  34.  See  Humphrey  Carpenter,  Biography,  p.  213; Letters  of J.  R. R.
       Tolkien  no.  134  (29  August  1952).  The  tape-recording   of  the
       'Troll  Song' made  by Mr.  Sayer on  that occasion  is heard  on the
       Caedmon  record  (TC  1477)  issued  in  1975.  The  version  sung by
       my father was the third of the present texts.                        
  35.  The second text is much closer to that in FR, but still  distinct: in
       the first verse And sat  there hard  and hungry  stands in  place of
       For meat  was hard  to come  by, in  the third  Before I  found his
       carkis for Afore I found his shin-bone, and in the fifth Thee'll be a
       nice change from thy nuncle! for I'll try  my teeth  on thee  now. In
       this  text  the fifth,  sixth, and  seventh lines  of each  verse were
       omitted, but were pencilled in later, mostly as they appear in FR.
         The  third  text  changed  And  sat  there hard  and hungry  in the
       first  verse  to  And  seen  no  man nor  mortal (with  rhyming words
       Ortal!  Portal!),  which  goes  back  to  The  Root  of  the  Boot in
       Songs for the Philologists (VI.143),  but this  was corrected  on the
       manuscript  to  the  final line  For meat  was hard  to come  by (and
       was so  sung by  my father  in 1952,  see note  34). The  third verse
       preserved Afore I found his carkis (with  the last  line He's  got no
       use for his carkis), and the fifth preserved Thee'll be a nice change
       from thy nuncle!                                                     
  36.  But   the  information   that  the   Baranduin  was   the  Brandywine
                                                                           
       survived as a footnote at this point in FR  (p. 222).  - This  is no
       doubt the first occurrence  of B(a)randuin  in the  narrative, origin
       of  the  'popular  etymology'  Brandywine  among  the  hobbits. Both
       Branduin  and  Baranduin  are  given  in  an  added  entry   in  the
       Etymologies  in  Vol.  V  (stem BARAN,  p. 351).  - As  the passage
       appears  in  the  manuscript,  the  name  of  the river  was written
       Branduin,  corrected  to  Baranduin, and  (much later)  to Malevarn.

                                     IV.                                  
                         OF HAMILCAR, GANDALF, AND                        
                                  SARUMAN.                                
                                                                         
 On  5  August  1940  the  Registrar  of  Oxford  University  wrote  to  my
 father  enclosing  examination  scripts  that  had  been received  from an
 American  candidate  in  the  Honour  School  of  English.  These provided
 a good quantity of paper, and my father  used it  for the  continuation of
 the  interrupted story  of the  Mines of  Moria and  for revisions  of the
 story already in existence;  he was  still using  it when  he came  to the
 departure  of  the  Company  from  Lothlorien.(1) In the Foreword  to the
 Second Edition of The Lord  of the  Rings he  said that  he 'halted  for a
 long while'  by Balin's  tomb in  Moria; and  that 'it  was almost  a year
 later' when he went  on 'and  so came  to Lothlorien  and the  Great River
 late in 1941.' I have argued (VI.461) that in saying this he erred  in his
 recollection,  and  that  it was  towards the  end of  1939, not  of 1940,
 that  he reached  Balin's tomb;  and the  use of  this paper,  received in
 August  1940,  for  the  renewed  advance  in   the  narrative   seems  to
 support this view.(2) Of course  it may  be that  he did  not begin  using it
 until significantly later, though that does not seem particularly likely.
  At  any rate,  for the  attempt to  deduce a  consecutive account  of the
 writing  of  The  Lord  of  the Rings  this was  a most  fortunate chance,
 since the use  of a  readily recognisable  paper the  supply of  which was
 limited makes it  possible to  gain a  much clearer  idea of  the develop-
 ment that took place  at this  time than  would otherwise  be the  case. I
 shall refer to this paper as 'the August 1940 examination script'.       
  It is not, to be  sure, clear  whether my  father meant  that he  put the
 whole  thing  away  for  the  better  part  of  a  year,  or   whether  he
 distinguished  between  'new  narrative'  -  the  onward  movement  of the
 story  from  the  Chamber  of  Mazarbul  - and  the rewriting  of existing
 chapters.  Dates  in  the  latter  part  of  1939  have  appeared  in  the
 preceding chapters: the 'final decisions' of  8 October  1939 (p.  8), the
 'New  Plot'  of  Autumn  1939 (p.  9), and  the date  October 1939  of the
 'fourth phase' version of the long 'Bree' chapter (p.  40). A  'New Plot',
 given  in  the  present  chapter,  is dated  August 1940.  It may  be much
 oversimplified to suppose that nothing at  all was  done between  the last
 months  of  1939  and  the  late  summer  of  1940,  but  at  least  it is
 convenient to present  the material  in this  way, and  in this  chapter I
 collect together various texts that certainly belong to the latter time.

    In the 'fourth phase' version of 'A Knife in the Dark' the story  of the
  attack on Crickhollow took  this form  (p. 55):  the Black  Riders carried
  Hamilcar Bolger out of  the house  as an  inert bundle,  and as  they rode
  away  'another  horse came  thundering along  the lane.  As it  passed the
  gate a horn rang out.' I noted that this story belongs  with what  is said
  in  the  time-scheme  D  (p.  12:  Thursday  29 September:  'Riders attack
  Crickhollow and carry off Ham, pursued by Gandalf').                      
    A  very  rough  manuscript  written  on  the  August   1940  examination
  script described above gives a version of the event as recounted  later at
  Rivendell  by  Gandalf  and  Hamilcar Bolger.  This text  takes up  at the
  point  where  Frodo,  leaving  his  bedroom  at  Rivendell, goes  down and
  finds his friends in the porch (for the previous state of this part of the
  story see VI.365); but I do not think that anything  has been  lost before
  this point - it was a particular  passage of  the 'Many  Meetings' chapter
  rewritten to introduce the new story.                                     
                                                                           
    There  seemed  to  be   three  hobbits   sitting  there   with  Gandalf.
  'Hurray!'   cried   one   of   them,   springing   up.  'Here   comes  our
  noble cousin!' It was Hamilcar Bolger.                                    
    'Ham!'   cried   Frodo,   astounded.   'How    did   you    come   here?
  And why?'                                                                 
    'On   horseback;   and   representing   Mr.   F.   Baggins   of   Crick-
  hollow, and late of Hobbiton,' answered Ham.                              
    Merry  laughed.  'Yes,'  he  said.  'We  told  him  so,  but  he  didn't
  believe  it:  we  left  poor  old  Ham  in  a dangerous  post. As  soon as
  the   Black   Riders   had   found   Crickhollow,   where    Mr.   Baggins
  was popularly supposed to be residing, they attacked it.'                 
    'When did that happen?' asked Frodo.                                    
    'Before   dawn   on  Friday   morning,(3) four   days  nearly   after  you
  left,  said  Ham.  They  got  me  -   he  paused   and  shuddered   -  but
  Gandalf came in the nick of time.'                                        
    'Not  quite  the  nick,'  said  Gandalf.  'A  notch  or  two  behind,  I
  am   afraid.   Two   of  the   Riders  must   have  crept   into  Buckland
  secretly,  while  a  third  took  the  horses  down  the  other   side  of
  the  River  inside  the  Shire.   They  stole   the  ferryboat   from  the
  Buckland  shore  on  Thursday  night,  and  got   their  horses   over.  I
  arrived  too  late,  just  as  they  reached the  other side.  Galeroc had
  to  swim  the  river.  Then  I  had  a  hard  chase:  but  I  caught  them
  ten  miles  beyond  the  Bridge.  I  have  one  advantage:  there   is  no
  horse  in  Mordor  or  in  Rohan  that  is  as  swift  as   Galeroc.(4) When
  they  heard  his  feet  behind  them  they  were  terrified:  they thought
  I  was  somewhere  else,  far  away.  I was  terrified too,  I may  say: I
  thought it was Frodo they had got.'                                       
    'Yes!'  said  Hamilcar  with  a   laugh.  'He   did  not   know  whether

                                                                      
                                                                       
 he  was  relieved  or  disgusted  when he  found it  was only  poor old
 Ham  Bolger.  I  was  too  crushed  to  mind  at  the  time:  he bowled
 the  Rider that  was carrying  me clean  over; but  I feel  rather hurt
 now.'                                                                  
   'You  are  perfectly  well  now,'  said  Gandalf;  'and you  have had
 a  free  ride  all the  way to  Rivendell, which  you would  never have
 seen,  if  you  had  been  left  to your  own sluggishness.  Still, you
 have  been  useful  in  your  way.' He  turned to  Frodo: 'It  was from
 Ham  that  I  heard  you  had  gone  into  the  Old  Forest,'  he said;
 'and  that  filled  me with  fresh anxiety.  I turned  off the  Road at
 once,  and  went  immediately   to  visit   Bombadil.  That   seems  to
 have  proved  lucky;  for  I  believe  the  three Riders  reported that
 Gandalf  and  Baggins  had   ridden  East.   Their  chieftain   was  at
 Amrath,   far  down   the  Greenway   in  the   south,  and   the  news
 must  have  reached  him  late  on  Friday.  I  fancy  the  Chief Rider
 was   sorely   puzzled   when   the   advance   guard   reported   that
 Baggins  and  the  Ring  had  been  in  Bree the  very night  when they
 thought  they  had  caught  him  in   Crickhollow!  Some   Riders  seem
 to  have  been  sent  straight  across  country  to   Weathertop. Five (5)
 came  roaring  along  the  Road.  I  was  safe  back  at the  Pony when
 they  passed  through  Bree   on  Saturday   night.  They   leaped  the
 gates  and  went  through   like  a   howling  wind.   The  Breelanders
 are  still   shivering  and   wondering  what   is  happening   to  the
 world.  I  left  Bree  next  morning,  and  rode  day and  night behind
 them, and we reached Weathertop on the evening of the third.'          
   'So  Sam  was  right!'  said  Frodo.  'Yes,  sir,   seemingly,'  said
 Sam,   feeling   rather   pleased;(6) but Gandalf   frowned   at   the
 interruption.                                                          
   'We   found   two   Riders    already   watching    Weathertop,'   he
 went   on.   'Others   soon   gathered   round,   returning   from  the
 pursuit  further  east  along  the  Road.  Ham  and  I  passed  a  very
 bad  night  besieged  on  the  top  of   Weathertop.  But   they  dared
 not  attack  me  in  the  daylight.  In  the  morning  we  slipped away
 northwards  into  the  wilds.  Several  pursued  us;  two  followed  us
 right  up  the  Hoarwell  into  the  Entishlands.  That  is   why  they
 were  not  in  full force  when you  arrived, and  did not  observe you
 at once.'                                                              
                                                                       
   Here the text ends, but it is followed by another version of the last
 part, following on from 'we slipped away northwards into the wilds':
                                                                       
    ?.. not too secretly - I wanted to draw them off. But the Chief
      Rider was too cunning: only four came after us, and only two      

                                       
                                                                            
 pursued  us  far;  and  they  turned aside  when we  reached the            
 Entishlands and went back towards the Ford, I fancy. Still, that            
 is why they were not  in full  force when  you arrived,  and why            
 they did not at once pursue [you] in the wild/Still, that is why            
 they  did not  immediately hunt  for you  in the  wilderness, or            
 observe your arrival  at Weathertop;  and why  they were  not in            
 full force for the attack on you.                                           
                                                                            
  Comparison  of  this  account  with  the  time-scheme  D  (pp.  12-13) will
 show  that  the  narrative  fits  the  scheme closely.  In both,  the Riders
 crossed  the  Brandywine  by  the  Ferry  on  the   night  of   Thursday  29
 September;  Gandalf  rescued  Ham  from  the   Riders  on   Friday  morning;
 two  Riders  (as  the narrative  was first  written, see  note 5)  were sent
 direct  to  Weathertop,  and  (again  as first  written) seven  rode through
 Bree,  throwing  down  or  leaping  the gates,  on the  night of  Saturday 1
 October,   while  Gandalf   and  Ham   were  at   The  Prancing   Pony;  two
 Riders  were  already  at  Weathertop  when  Gandalf   and  Ham   got  there
 in  the  evening  of  Monday  3  October,  after riding  day and  night; and
 Gandalf and Ham left Weathertop on the following morning.                   
  Gandalf's  horse  is   now  named   Galeroc,  replacing   earlier  Narothal
 (VI.345);  and  the  name  Amrath  appears,  of  the  place where  the chief
 of the Riders remained, far down the Greenway in the south.'(7)             
  This  narrative  seems  to  belong  also  with  the 'fourth  phase' version
 of 'A Knife in the Dark' (p. 55):  the horse  that came  racing up  the lane
 as  the  Riders  rode  off  with  Ham  Bolger was  bearing Gandalf  from the
 Ferry, 'a notch or two behind' the nick of  time, as  he said  at Rivendell.
 Yet there is a difficulty, or at any rate a difference; for the story of the
 attack  on  Crickhollow  in  this  version,  as in  all those  preceding it,
 described  a  long  period  ('time went  slowly on')  between the  coming of
 the  Riders  into  the  garden  of  Crickhollow  and  the breaking  into the
 house.  If  Gandalf  came  to  Bucklebury  Ferry  just  as  the  Riders with
 their horses reached the  other side,  and he  at once  put Galeroc  to swim
 the  river,  he  cannot  have  been  more  than a  matter of  minutes behind
 them.                                                                       
                                                                            
  A  new  narrative  outline,  written roughly  and rapidly  on two  sides of
 a single sheet, is  headed: 'New  Plot. Aug.  26 -  27, 1940'.  This outline
 was  subsequently  altered  and  added  to,  but  I  give  it here  as first
 written.  I  have  expanded contractions  and in  other small  ways slightly
 edited the text to make it easier to follow.                                
                                                                            
    The  wizard  Saramond  the  White  [written  above   at  the   same  time:
  Saramund   the   Grey]   or   Grey   Saruman  sends   out  a   message  that
  there  is  important  news:  Trotter  hears  that Black  Riders are  out and
  moving  towards  the   Shire  (for   which  they   are  asking).   He  sends
  word  to  Gandalf,  who  leaves  Hobbiton  at  the  end  of  June.  He  goes

 S.E.  (leaving Trotter  to keep  an eye  on the  Shire-borders) towards
 Rohan (or Horserland).                                                
   Gandalf knows that  9 Black  Riders (and  especially their  king) are
 too much  for him  alone. He  wants the  help of  Saramund. So  he goes
 to  him  where  he  lived  on  the  borders  of  Rohan at  Angrobel (or
 Irongarth).                                                           
   Saramund  betrays  him  -  having  fallen  and  gone over  to Sauron:
 (either) he  tells Gandalf  false news  of the  Black Riders,  and they
 pursue him to the top of a mountain;  there he  is left  standing alone
 with a guard (wolves, orcs, etc. all  about) while  they ride  off with
 mocking  laugh;  (or  else)  he  is  handed  over  to  a  giant Fangorn
 (Treebeard) who imprisons him?                                        
   Meanwhile  the  Black  Riders  attack  the   Shire,  coming   up  the
 Greenway  and  driving  a  crowd of  fugitives among  which are  one or
 two  evil  men, Sauronites.(8) The King  of the  Black Riders  encamps at
 Amrath to guard Sarn Ford and Bridge.                                  
   6  Riders  (DEFGHI)  go  ahead  and  invade  the Shire.  The vanguard
 Rider (D)  reaches Bag-End  on Sept.  23 (night).  Two (DE)  then trail
 Frodo etc. to the Ferry (Sept. 25). F G HI are on the  main road.  D E,
 foiled at the Ferry (Sept. 25), ride off to Brandywine Bridge  and join
 F c H t (dawn on Sept. 26).                                           
   HI then ride along scouring  both sides  of the  Road and  reach Bree
 up and down Greenway [sic] on Tuesday Sept. 27.(9)                    
   On  night  (cockcrow)  of Sept.  26 -  27 D  E F  attack Crickhollow.
 There  they  carry  off Ham.  c was  left guarding  the Bridge  but now
 comes with them.                                                      
   HI  go  on  through  Bree  asking  for  news, to  make sure 'Baggins'
 has not escaped and got ahead. They get in touch with Bill Ferney.
   DEFG  with  poor  Ham  now  ride  to  Greenway (does  Harry see
 them?  Probably  not).  At Amrath  they meet  the King  (A) and  BC, on
 Wednesday  28th,  leaving  for  the  moment  the  Road   deserted.  The
 King is angry at this.  He is  suspicious of  a plot  since Ham  has no
 Ring.  DE  are  sent  back  to  Bree, arriving  late on  Thursday 29th.
 (Meanwhile  the  hobbits  have  got  to the  Inn.) FG  go back  to the
 Shire.                                                                
   DE  get  in touch  with Bill  Ferney, and  hear of  news at  the Inn.
 [Struck out at once: They attack  the Inn  but fail  (and get  the idea
 that Green'(10) has gone  off?)] They  fear Trotter',  but get  Bill Ferney
 and  the  Southerner  to  burgle  the Inn  and try  and get  more news,
 especially  of  the  Ring.  (They  are puzzled  by two  Bagginses.) The
 burglary fails; but they drive off all the ponies.                    
   FG bring news to the King  that Gandalf  has escaped  and is  in the
 Shire  (which   he  reached   on  Wednesday   28th  [>   Thursday  29th
 night], and visited Bag-End and the Gaffer).                          
   DE  return  to  the  King  and report  (Sept. 30):  he is  puzzled by
 'Green'  and the  Ring, by  Baggins and  Ham, and  troubled by  news of

  Gandalf  behind.  He  does  not  kill Ham  because he  wants to  find out
  more,  and  Sauron  has  ordered  him  to bring  'Baggins' to  Mordor. HI
  return  (Oct.  1) reporting  nothing on  the Road  as far  as Weathertop,
  and  that  Green  and  Trotter  have  left  Bree and vanished.  The King
  decides to pursue Green with all his forces, carrying Ham with him.        
    Gandalf  goes  to  Crickhollow  late  on  Thursday  29th  and  finds it
  deserted.  Old  cloak  of  Frodo  dropped.  Gandalf  is   terrified  lest
  Frodo is captive. (? Does he visit Tom  - if  so make  him arrive  in the
  Shire on the 28th and visit Buckland on the 29th; if  not, arrive  in the
  Shire  on  the 29th,  visit Buckland  on the  30th.) Either  visiting Tom
  or  not,  Gandalf  reaches  Bree on  Saturday Oct.  1 (after  the hobbits
  have  gone).  He  rides  after  them.  The  Black  Riders  meanwhile have
  left  Amrath  and  revisited  Bree  to get  news of  Green, and  gone off
  along  the  Road  on  both  sides.  Gandalf  crashes  into  DE   who  are
  carrying  Ham  and  rescues  him.  He  gallops  to  Weathertop,  reaching
  it on  Oct. 3.  He sees  Black Riders  gather and  goes off  North (three
  Riders,  D  E  F,  pursue  him).   The  rest   patrol  round   and  watch
  Weathertop.                                                                
                                                                            
 Here  we have  the story  of the  capture of  Hamilcar Bolger  again, but
 with a significant difference. In Time-scheme D (p. 12), and in the story
 told by  Gandalf at  Rivendell (p.  68), the  attack on  Crickhollow took
 place  on  the  night  of  Thursday-Friday   29-30  September;   and  the
 story there was that Gandalf arrived just as the Riders left, and  he was
 able to catch them up ten  miles east  of the  Brandywine Bridge.  In the
 present  outline,  the  attack  on  Crickhollow  took place  three nights
 earlier,  on  that of  Monday -  Tuesday 26-27  September (Frodo  and the
 others  having  left  on  the  Monday morning),  and since  Gandalf still
 arrives there late on the 29th (or the 30th) he finds the trail cold; but
 he also finds Frodo's cloak  dropped on  the step.  He still  rescues Ham,
 but not till his captors have passed Bree. It  is curious  therefore that
 (though  he  was  uncertain  about  it)  my  father  had  not  decisively
 rejected the visit to Tom Bombadil,  since with  this plot  Gandalf could
 have had no notion that the hobbits had entered the Old Forest.             
  This is very probably the first appearance of Saruman (Saramond,           
 Saramund),  who  steps  into  the  narrative  quite  unheralded -  but he
 enters at once as a Wizard whose aid Gandalf seeks, and who has             
 'fallen and gone over to Sauron'; moreover he dwells at Angrobel or         
 'Irongarth' (cf. Isengard) 'on the borders of Rohan'.  But my  father was
 still  quite  uncertain  what  happened to  Gandalf, having  rejected the
 story of the Western Tower:  the possibilities  suggested here  show that
 the imprisonment in a tower had been for the moment abandoned.              
 Giant Fangorn or Treebeard again appears as a hostile being (cf. p. 9).     
  I  suspect  that  the  primary  question  that  my father  was pondering
 here  was  that  of  the  emergence  of  the  Ringwraiths   from  Mordor,
 Gandalf's knowledge  of this  in the  summer before  Frodo left  Bag End,  
                                                                            

              
                                                                         
 and Trotter's message. It  has been  said already  (p. 9)  that 'It  was a
 message of Trotter's in July (?) that  took Gandalf  away -  fearing Black
 Riders', and again (p. 10)  'It was  a message  from Trotter  that fetched
 Gandalf  away  in  summer before  Frodo left'.  These notes  indicate that
 Gandalf  already  had  reason,  when  he  left  Hobbiton,  to  suspect the
 emergence of the  Ringwraiths; but  it is  now told,  at the  beginning of
 the  present  outline,  that  the message  from Trotter  (itself emanating
 from  Saruman)  was  an  actual  report  that  the  Nine  had  left Mordor
 and  were  moving  towards  the  Shire.  This  would  raise  the question:
 why, in that case,  did Gandalf,  before he  went off,  not urge  Frodo to
 leave for Rivendell as  soon as  he could?  Scribblings on  the manuscript
 of  this  outline  show  my  father  concerned  with  the  question: 'Both
 Gandalf  and  Trotter  must  go  away   together  and   not  fear   to  be
 captured, or else Gandalf would  have sent  a message  to Frodo  to start,
 or Trotter would have.' Then follows  a suggestion  that Trotter  'got cut
 off from Gandalf, only arriving in Bree hard  on the  tracks of  the Black
 Riders.' But this does not seem entirely to meet the difficulty.  Later my
 father noted here: 'Leaves  Butterbur a  letter which  he forgets  to send
 to Frodo', and this is clearly where that essential idea arose.          
  In FR (p. 269) the problem  is resolved  by reverting  to the  story that
 when  Gandalf  left  Hobbiton  he had  no definite  knowledge, and  by the
 introduction of Radagast. 'At the end of June I  was in  the Shire,  but a
 cloud  of  anxiety was  on my  mind, and  I rode  to the  southern borders
 of the little land; for I had a  foreboding of  some danger,  still hidden
 from  me but  drawing near.'  It was  Radagast who  told Gandalf  that the
 Nine  were  abroad,  whereupon  Gandalf,  at  Bree,  wrote  the  letter to
 Frodo which Butterbur forgot to send.                                    
                                                                         
  Another  brief but  distinctive narrative  passage is  clearly associated
 with this 'August 1940' outline. It was substituted  in the  manuscript of
 the 'fourth phase' version of  Chapter IX  ('At the  Sign of  the Prancing
 Pony (i)') for that in  which the  Black Riders  spoke to  Harry Goatleaf,
 the  gatekeeper  at  Bree,  on  the  evening  of  Wednesday  the  28th  of
 September (pp. 40 - 1), and was itself subsequently rejected.            
                                                                         
  The  rain  that  swept  over  the  Forest  and  the   Downs  on         
 Tuesday was still  falling long  and grey  on Bree  when evening         
 came. The lights were just being lit in  Tom's house,(11) when the         
 noise  of  horses  approaching  came  down  the  Road  from  the         
 west. Harry Goatleaf the gatekeeper peered out  of his  door and         
 scowled at the rain. He had been thinking of going out  to close         
 the  gate,  when  he caught  the sound  of the  horsemen. Reluc-         
 tantly he waited, wishing now that he had shut the gate earlier:         
 he did not like  the sound.  Two horsemen  had appeared  in Bree         
 late the day before (12) and wild stories  were going  about. People         
 had been scared; some said  the riders  were uncanny:  dogs yam-         

                                       
                                                                        
 mered,  and  geese  screamed  at   them.  Yet   they  were   asking  for
 news  of  hobbits  out  of   the  Shire,   especially  for   one  called
 Baggins. Very queer.                                                    
  Harry  thought  it  even  queerer   a  minute   later.  He   went  out,
 grumbling  at  the  rain,  and  looking  up  the  Road  he   thought  he
 saw  dark  figures  approaching  swiftly,  three  or  maybe   four.  But
 suddenly  they  turned  left  at  the  Cross Roads (13) just beyond  the
 gate,   and   went   off   southwards   and   down  the   Greenway;  all
 sound of their horses' feet died away on the grass-grown track.         
  'Queerer   and  queerer!'   he  thought.   'That  way   leads  nowhere.
 Who  would  turn  off  on  a  wet  night  just  in sight  of the  Inn at
 Bree?'  He  shivered  suddenly  all  down  his  back.  Locking  the gate
 he hurried into his house and bolted the door.                          
  Wednesday   turned   foggy   after   midday;   but   still   the  queer
 events   went   on.   Out   of   the   mists   up  the   Greenway  there
 straggled  such  a  company  as  had  not  been  seen  in Bree  for many
 a  year:  strange  men  from  the  South,   haggard  and   wayworn,  and
 bearing   heavy  burdens.   Most  of   them  had   a  hunted   look  and
 seemed  too  tired  and  scared  to  talk;  but  some  were ill-favoured
 and rough-spoken. They made quite a stir in Bree.                       
  The   next  day,   Thursday,  was   clear  and   fine  again,   with  a
 warm  sun  and  a  wind  that  veered  from  East  towards   the  South.
 No  traveller  passed  the  western  gate  all  day,  but Harry  kept on
 going to the gate, even after nightfall.                                
                                                                        
  This would then join on to the  next part  of the  text, 'It  was dark,
 and white  stars were  shining, when  Frodo and  his companions  came at
 last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the village' (cf. VI.348).
  With  this  compare  the  'August  1940'  outline  (p.  71):  DEFG with
 poor  Ham  now  ride  to  Greenway  (does   Harry  see   them?  Probably
 not).' I think it is clear that when Harry Goatleaf saw the dark figures
 mysteriously turn off down the Greenway  at the  crossroads in  the rain
 at dusk, they had Hamilcar  Bolger with  them, bearing  him to  the King
 at Amrath. And  with the  description of  the company  that came  up the
 Greenway on the Wednesday cf. an  earlier passage  in the  same outline:
 'Meanwhile  the  Black  Riders attack  the Shire,  coming up  the Green-
 way and driving a crowd of  fugitives among  which are  one or  two evil
 men, Sauronites.'                                                       
                                                                        
           In the margin of the 'fourth phase' version of the attack on
 Crickhollow (p. 55) my father later noted:                              
                                                                        
  Omit, or bring into line with old  version (in  middle of  Chapter VII).
  Ham  cannot  be  captured (Black  Riders would  obviously kill  him). It
  probably spoils surprise to show what Gandalf  is up  to at  this point.
  Gandalf can briefly explain that [? he was at] Crickhollow.            

                                          
                                                                          
 There is a definitive tone about this that suggests that this is  where the
 'Odo-Hamilcar'  adventure  was  finally  abandoned;  and if  this is  so it
 must be placed, of course, after the outline  dated 'Aug.  26 -  27, 1940'.
 Presumably  it was  at this  time that  the 'fourth  phase' version  of the
 'Crickhollow episode' was struck through.                                 
   Labelling  this  rejected form  'A', my  father seems  now to  have tried
 out a version (labelled  'B') which  follows his  direction to  'bring (the
 story) into line with the old version (in  middle of  Chapter VII)'  - i.e.
 the  original form  of the  episode, which  was inserted  in the  course of
 the  'second  phase'  into  Chapter  VII  'In  the  House of  Tom Bombadil'
 (VI.303-4),  at  which  stage  the story  was that  the house  at Crickhol-
 low  was  empty  when  the  Riders  came,  for  no  hobbit  had  been  left
 behind there. In  version 'B'  there is  no mention  of Hamilcar  Bolger at
 all. The 'man in grey', leading  a white  horse, comes  up the  path, looks
 in  at the  windows, and  disappears round  the corner  of the  house; then
 the Black Riders come; at first  cockcrow they  break in  the door;  and at
 that moment the horn call rings out, the Riders flee, with 'a cry  like the
 cry  of  hunting  beasts  stricken  unawares'  (cf.  VI.304),  and  Gandalf
 appears wielding horn and wand and thunders after them.                   
   A  page of  notes is  associated with  these attempts  to find  the right
 form for the opening of 'A Knife in the Dark'. These begin:               
                                                                          
   It will improve matters to cut out Ham  Bolger. Version  B will         
   provide for that. (Gandalf arrives, takes Ham Bolger out of the         
   house, and chases off the Black Riders.)                                
                                                                          
 This is obscure, since there is no mention in the  version labelled  'B' of
 Gandalf's entering the  house, no  mention of  a light  in the  window, nor
 any suggestion that it was inhabited. But in  any case  it was  clearly not
 my  father's meaning  when he  wrote 'It  will improve  matters to  cut out
 Ham  Bolger'  that  he   intended  to   cut  him   out  of   the  narrative
 altogether:  he  meant  only  that  Ham  was  to  be excluded  from further
 adventures  after  the  'Crickhollow  episode'  was  ended.  Conceivably,
 he  had  here  a  passing   notion  that   Gandalf  came   to  Crickhollow,
 entered  secretly,  told Ham  Bolger to  clear out,  and proceeded  to look
 after  the  Black  Riders  himself.  Whatever  the  meaning,   these  notes
 continue:                                                                 
                                                                          
   But better would be this:                                               
      Gandalf is captured by [Saramund >] Saruman.                         
      Elves  send  word  that  he  is missing,  which reaches  Rivendell Sat.
   8th.(14) Glorfindel  is  sent  out,  and  messengers  sent  to  Eagles. The
   Eagles are  told about  Oct. 11.  They fly  all over  the lands,  and find
   Gandalf about Sat. 15. Bring... to Rivendell Wed. 19th.                 
      The  XIII  and  wood  are  Sam's  discovery.  Trotter  says  it   is  a
   rangers' camp.                                                          
      Weakness  of  this  is  that  Black  Riders  are  sure  to   make  some
   attempt on Crickhollow. How was it foiled?                              

                                 
                                                                            
       Ham flies as shown overleaf.                                          
       Then Gandalf can come and find house deserted and only old            
     cloak  of  Frodo's.  He thinks  Frodo [struck  out: is  capt(ured)]. He
     follows like thunder.                                                   
                                                                            
  'Ham flies as shown  overleaf' refers  to a  third version,  labelled 'C',
  which  (though at  first differently  ordered in  the articulation  of the
  narrative) scarcely differs from  that in  FR (with  Ham opening  the door
  of the house, seeing a black shape in the garden, and  fleeing out  of the
  back door and over the fields), apart of course from the fact that this is
  Hamilcar   and   not  Fredegar,   and  apart   from  the   notable  words,
  afterwards lost, following 'Ham Bolger  had not  been idle':  'Terror will
  drive even a Bolger to action'. The hobbit-cloak  let fall  by one  of the
  Riders as he fled reappears  from the  'August 1940'  outline (p.  72). At
  the head of this version my father noted:                                  
                                                                            
     Gandalf  does  not  follow  [i.e.  he  does  not  follow the  Black Riders
     from   Crickhollow].   Either  he   comes  later,   Saturday  Oct.   1  or
     [Sunday Oct.] 2 (and finds cloak),  or else  he is  taken by  eagles... to
     Rivendell.                                                              
                                                                            
  This no  doubt preceded  the notes  given above.  These are  certainly the
  first  references  to Gandalf's escape from  captivity by  the aid  of the
  Eagles., and the entry of Radagast is now on the threshold.(15)           
     The apparently irrelevant  mention of  Trotter's saying  that 'it  is a
  rangers'  camp' is  presumably associated  with the  idea that  the Eagles
  found Gandalf and carried him  to Rivendell  - so  that, with  this story,
  he  would never  go to  Weathertop at  all. But  what the  significance of
  'The  XIII  and  wood  are  Sam's discovery'  may be  I cannot  say. Sam's
  interpretation  of  the  'X:IIII'  has  appeared,  but  that  was  only  a
  refinement  of  Trotter's view  that they  were marks  made by  Gandalf on
  the stone found  on the  summit of  Weathertop and  referred to  the date:
  see pp. 56-7. I have noticed there  that Sam's  intervention does  not fit
  the story, since there is  never any  suggestion that  he was  among those
  who  went  up  to  the  high  place where  the stone  was found;  and also
  that  'X:IIII'  was  subsequently  changed  to  'X:III'.  Conceivably, the
  passing idea here was that  the 'X  III', retained  but given  a different
  significance  (a  Rangers'  mark?),  was  not  found on  the stone  on the
  cairn, but on the firewood in the dell.                                    
                                                                            
     At this time Chapter X, 'At the Sign  of the  Prancing Pony  (ii)', was
  once  more  heavily  overhauled.(16) This revision was carried out in two
  stages, clearly not  long separated.  The completion  of the  revision was
  written on  pages of  the August  1940 examination  script; and  with this
  the chapter as it stands in FR was achieved in all points, save for  a few
  minor additions and alterations that were certainly later.                 
     By this time 'Pippin'  was firmly  established. In  the first  stage of
  revision  Frodo's  assumed  name  at  Bree was  still 'Green',  but became

        
                                                                                 
 'Underhill'  in  the  second.  Mr  Butterbur  is  still  Barnabas,  not Barliman.
 His  account   of  Frodo's   distinguishing  marks   as  received   from  Gandalf
 (in  addition  to  his  bring 'a  round-bellied little  fellow with  red cheeks')
 at first  gave him  'a white  lock of  hair by  his left  ear and  a wart  on his
 chin.'   The   second   version   made   him  'broader   than  most   and  fairer
 than  some',  and  still  with  a  wart  on  his  chin.  The   final  description
 came in later.                                                                   
   The   scribbled  suggestion   on  the   manuscript  of   the  'New   Plot'  (p.
 73),  'Leaves  Butterbur  a  letter  which  he  forgets  to  send to  Frodo', was
 now  taken  up,  but  it  was not  until the  second stage  of revision  that the
 form  of  the  episode  in  FR  was  reached.  At  first  the  preceding  version
 was  more  largely  retained,  notably  in  the  story  of  the two  letters (pp.
 49  ff.).  The  substance  of  Gandalf's  letter  to  Frodo  reaches the  form in
 FR  (with  the  date  now  Friday  July 2nd),  but there  are differences  in the
 postscripts:                                                                     
                                                                                 
    PS. Look out for horsemen in black. Deadly enemies, especially                
   after dark. Do not move by night. Do not use IT again, not for any             
   reason whatever.                                                              
    PPS. Make sure it is the real Trotter. His true name is Aragorn               
   son of Celegorn.(17)                                                           
                     All that is gold does not glitter,                           
                     not all those that wander are lost;                          
                     All that is old does not wither,                             
                     and pre may burn bright in the frost;                        
                     Not all that have fallen are vanquished,                     
                     not only the crowned is a king;                              
                     Let blade that was broken be brandished,                     
                     and Fire be the Doom of the Ring!(18)                        
    Aragorn would know that rhyme. Ask him what follows after All               
   that is gold does not glitter.                                                 
    PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy man, but                 
   his mind is like a lumber-room: things wanted always buried. If he             
   forgets, I shall have words with him one day.                                  
    The real Trotter will have a sealed letter (addressed to you) with           
   these words inside: All that is gold does not glitter etc.                     
                                                                                 
 At  this  stage  Frodo  still  read  Gandalf's  letter aloud;  and Trotter       
 produced the second letter, which after the verse reads:                         
                                                                                 
   This is to witness that the bearer is Aragorn son of Celegorn [>                
   Kelegorn] knoum as the Trotter. Who trusts Gandalf may trust him.              
                                                                                 
 As  there  is  now  no  mention  of  Elendil,  the passage  that followed  in the
 former  version  ('Then  It  belongs  to  you  as  much  as   to  me,   or  more'
 etc.,  p.  50)  was  removed  (see  p.  105,  note  3);  and  Trotter  now  says,
 after  'The  Enemy  has  set  traps  for  me  before  now',  'I  was   puzzled  -

                          
                                                                          
  because you did  not produce  your letter  or ask  for the  pass-words. It
  was not till old Barnabas confessed that I understood.'                  
     I do not think that it was long  before my  father abandoned  the story
  of  the  second letter,  and on  pages of  the August  1940 script  the FR
  text was reached - with Gandalf's letter read silently, Trotter  using the
  words  All  that  is  gold  does  not  glitter  quite  independently,  and
  drawing  out  the  Sword  that  was  Broken  (see  p.  116).  The  date of
  Gandalf's  letter  now  becomes  Wednesday  June  30th,  and  (probably at
  this time) the verse was changed again:                                  
                                                                          
               All that is gold does not glitter,                          
               not all those that wander are lost;                         
               All that is old does not wither,                           
               and bright may be fire in the frost.                        
               The pre that was low may be woken;                         
               and sharp in the sheath is the sting;                       
               Forged may be blade that was broken;                      
               the crownless again may be king.(19)                        
                                                                          
  Gandalf's signature remains still in Old English runes.                  
     Aragorn's  account  of his  last meeting  with Gandalf  at Sarn Ford on
  the first of May (FR p. 184) now appears, and in the same words.(20)     
  The  story  in  the  'New  Plot' (p.  70) that  'Trotter hears  that Black
  Riders  are  out  and  moving  towards  the  Shire....  He  sends  word to
  Gandalf,  who  leaves  Hobbiton  at  the  end  of  June'   had  presumably
  been  abandoned,  and  the  role  of  Radagast in  telling Gandalf  of the
  emergence of the Ringwraiths introduced (see pp. 82, 131).               
     The  now  chaotic  text  of  the  chapter,   a  mass   of  emendations,
  rejected pages, and inserted riders,  was later  replaced by  a typescript
  fair  copy:  how much  later I  cannot say.  Near the  end of  the chapter
  (FR  p.  184)  Trotter  says  (in  the  manuscript):  'Well,   with  Sam's
  permission we'll call that settled. Trotter shall be  your guide.  And now
  I think it is time you went to bed and took what rest  you can.  We shall
  have  a  rough  road tomorrow....'  In the  typescript text  that followed
  (the  latter part  of which  was not  typed by  my father)  the italicised
  words were  omitted; but  there is  no suggestion  in the  manuscript that
  they  should  be,  and  indeed  the  words  'We  shall  have a  rough road
  tomorrow'  clearly  depend  on  them.  But the  omission was  never picked
  up, and the sentence does not appear in FR.                              
     The series of rewritings of the beginning  of Chapter  XI, 'A  Knife in
  the Dark',  leading to  the final  elimination of  Ham Bolger's  ride with
  Gandalf,  have  been   considered  already   (pp.  74-6).   An  associated
  revision belonging to this time removed  the passage  (pp. 57-8)  in which
  Trotter  thought  that  he  found  hobbit  footprints  in  the  dell below
  Weathertop  that  might  be  distinct from  those of  Pippin and  Sam, and
  replaced  it  by  a  form  very  close  to  that in  FR p.  201 (beginning

      
                                                                       
 'Rangers have been here lately. It is they who left the firewood       
 behind'; cf. 'Trotter says it is a rangers' camp', p. 75).             
                                                                       
                                  NOTES.                                
                                                                       
  1. The   candidate's   name   was   Richard   Creswell   Rowland.  The
     scripts had been sent from the  United States.  At first  my father
     received only the scripts in the subjects that personally concerned
     him  as  an  examiner,  but  subsequently  most   or  all   of  the
     candidate's  writing  came  to  him.  He  used  not only  the blank
     verso sides of the paper, but also the blue covers of each booklet,
     where his writing becomes peculiarly hard to decipher.             
  2. A further argument in  favour of  this dating  can now  be adduced.
     In  notes  dated  Autumn  1939  and  October   8  1939   (pp.  8-9)
     Trotter has definitively ceased  to be  a hobbit  and has  become a
     man, Aragorn; but in the original  'Moria' chapter  he was  still a
     hobbit (or at any rate he certainly was in the original  version of
     'The  Ring  Goes  South',  with  which  'The  Mines  of  Moria' was
     continuous). See further p. 379.                                   
  3. 'Before  dawn  on  Friday  morning'  was  an immediate  change from
     'Thursday night'; cf. p. 55.                                       
  4. I do not think that there is any suggestion here that Galeroc was a
     horse from Rohan: he is simply Gandalf's horse, and it is essential
     that he be extraordinarily swift.                                  
  5. In the  preceding sentence  'Some Riders'  (those sent  to Weather-
     top) was first  written 'Two  Riders', and  'Five' here  (those who
     rode along the  Road to  Bree) was  written 'Seven',  agreeing with
     the  scheme  D  (p.  13).  'Two'  was  then  changed to  'Four' and
     'Seven' to 'Five'; finally 'Four' to 'Some'. - By roaring along the
     Road my father meant going at  wild speed,  with also  a suggestion
     of the great noise of their passage.                               
  6. This refers to the markings on the stone  at Weathertop,  which (by
     a change introduced into the 'fourth phase' version of 'A  Knife in
     the Dark') Sam realised were to be read, not as G.4, but  as G.1.3,
     and  which  Trotter  in his  turn thought  might mean  that Gandalf
     and another were at Weathertop on 3 October; see pp. 56-7.         
  7. With  this  cf.  Unfinished  Tales  p.   348:  'The   Black  Captain
     established  a  camp  at Andrath,  where the  Greenway passed  in a
     defile  between  the  Barrow-downs  and  the  South Downs.'  On the
     First Map  (p. 305)  Andrath (very  probably first  written Amrath,
     p. 298) is marked as a point beside the Greenway a little nearer to
     Bree than to Tharbad.                                              
  8. Cf. the end of the short text given on pp. 73 - 4.                 
  9. The  date  Tuesday  Sept.  27  was  subsequently  altered  to 'late
     Monday 26th ., see p. 63, note 10, and note 12 to this chapter.

  10.  Frodo's  assumed   name  'Green'   (replacing  'Hill')   has  already
       appeared (pp. 37, 41, etc.).                                         
  11.  Tuesday  27  September  was  the  second night  spent by  the hobbits
       in the house of Tom Bombadil.                                        
  12.  The riders H and I,  according to  the outline  (p. 71),  where their
       arrival  in   Bree  was   altered  from   Tuesday  27   September  to
       Monday the 26th (note 9).                                            
  13.  'turned left at the Cross Roads': i.e. from the point of view  of the
       gatekeeper, who was looking out westwards.                           
  14.  Word  reaches  Rivendell   that  Gandalf   is  missing   on  Saturday
       8 October: cf. the time-scheme D, p. 14.                             
  15.  Radagast   has   been  named,   but  no   more,  in   previous  texts
       (VI.379, 397),  and with  no indication  of what  part my  father was
       envisaging for him.                                                  
  16.  A  development from  this time  in Chapter  IX, 'At  the Sign  of the
       Prancing Pony (i)', has been given on pp. 73-4.                      
  17.  Aragorn  was  later  changed  here  to  Elfstone,  Erkenbrand,  again
       Elfstone, Ingold, and  finally back  to Aragorn,  and in  the passage
       'I am Aragorn son of Kelegorn, and  if by  life or  death I  can save
       you, I will' the name  was changed  to Elfstone  son of  Elfhelm. But
       these  changes  were  made  after  the second  stage of  revision had
       been  completed.  The  renaming  of  Aragorn  and   its  implications
       are discussed on pp. 277 - 8.                                        
  18.  An earlier stage in the evolution  of the  verse, following  from the
       original  form  in  the 'fourth  phase' version  of the  chapter (pp.
       49 - 50), was:                                                       
       All     that     is     gold     does     not    glitter;.
       not all those that wander are lost.                                  
       All     that    grows     old    does     not    wither;
       not every leaf falls in the frost.                                   
       Not    all    that    have    fallen    are    vanquished;
       a king may yet be without crown,                                     
       A    blade    that     was    broken     be    brandished;
       and towers that u ere strong may fall down.                         
  19.  In all these versions of All that is gold does not glitter, including
       the original  form on  pp. 49  - 50,  the verses  are written  in the
       manuscript as long lines (i.e. four lines not eight).                
  20.  In  FR  Gandalf  arrived  at  Bag End  after his  long absence  on an
       evening of  early April  (pp. 54-5);  'two or  three weeks'  later he
       advised Frodo that he ought  to leave  soon (p.  74); and  he 'stayed
       in the Shire for over two months' (p. 76) before he  left at  the end
       of June. There is  no reference  to his  having left  Hobbiton during
       this time.                                                           

                                      V.                                    
                         BILBO'S SONG AT RIVENDELL:                         
                         ERRANTRY AND EARENDILLINWE.                        
                                                                           
       We come now again to Rivendell, and to Book II of The Fellowship of
 .  the  Ring.  In  the 'third  phase' the  chapter which  afterwards became
 'Many   Meetings'   was  numbered   XII  and   entitled  'The   Council  of
 Elrond'  (VI.362)  -  because  at  that  stage  my  father thought  that it
 would  include  not  only  Frodo's  conversation   with  Gandalf   when  he
 awoke  at  Rivendell,  the  feast,  and  his  meeting  with Bilbo,  but the
 deliberations  of  the Council  also. Trotter  was still  at that  time, of
 course,  a  hobbit.  I  have  argued  (VI.369) that  this chapter  (and the
 'third  phase'  of  writing)  ended  abruptly  in  the  middle  of  Gloin's
 conversation  with Frodo  at the  feast -  at precisely  the same  point as
 did the  original form  of the  story in  the 'first  phase'; and  that the
 remainder  of the  chapter in  this manuscript  was added  in later  - when
 Trotter  had  become  Aragorn. Simply  for the  purpose of  this discussion
 I will call the first or 'third  phase' part  of the  manuscript (VI.362-6)
 'I', and the second part 'II'. Behind 'II' lie the rough draftings given in
 VI.391-4 (in which Trotter was still the hobbit Peregrin Boffin).          
   I have not been  able to  determine when  'II' was  written, but  it per-
 haps  comes  from  the  period  of  work  represented  by  the   notes  and
 rewritings of the 'fourth phase' in the first three chapters of  this book.
 Both 'I'  and 'II'  were subjected  to emendation  at different  times: for
 one  substantial  passage   of  rewriting   the  August   1940  examination
 script  was  used,  but  many  other  minor alterations  may be  earlier or
 later. In view of these uncertainties  I shall  do no  more here  than look
 briefly  through  the  chapter  (now  numbered   XIII,  since   the  'Bree'
 chapter  had  been  divided  into two,  IX and  X) and  show what  seems to
 have been its form at the stage of development we have now reached.        
                                                                           
  Looking  first  at  changes  made to  section 'I'  of the  manuscript, the
 passage in the third  phase version  (VI.362-3) beginning  'It is  no small
 feat  to  have  come so  far and  through such  dangers, still  bearing the
 Ring',  in  which  Gandalf  told  of his  captivity at  the hands  of Giant
 Treebeard  and  teased  Frodo's  curiosity  about  Trotter,   was  entirely
 rewritten. It now begins:                                                  
                                                                           
               'We should never have done it without Trotter,' said Frodo.

 'But we needed you. I did not know what to do without you.' .                
  'I was delayed,' said Gandalf; 'and that nearly proved our                  
 ruin. And yet I am not sure: it may have been better so.                     
 Knowing the peril I should not have dared to take such risks,                
 and we might either have been trapped in the Shire, or if I had              
 tried some long way round we might have been hunted down in,,                
 some wild place far from all help. As it is we have escaped the              
 pursuit - for the moment.'                                                   
                                                                             
 To Frodo's astonished 'You?' when Gandalf said that he was held              
 captive his reply now takes this form:                                       
                                                                             
  'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,' said the wizard solemnly. 'There                
 are many powers greater than mine, for good  or evil,  in the                
 world. I cannot stand alone against all the Black Riders.'(1)                
  'Then you knew of the Riders already - before I met them?'                  
                                                                             
 The text  is then  as in  FR, including  Gandalf's words  'But I  did not
 know that they had arisen again or I should have fled  with you  at once.
 I heard news of them only after I left you in June' (see p. 78). He says:
 'There are few left  in Middle-earth  like Aragorn  son of  Kelegorn.(2) The
 race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly  at an  end', and  Frodo in
 reply  says:  'Do  you  really  mean  that  Trotter  is  of  the  race of
 Numenor?'(3) To Frodo's 'I  thought  he  was   only  a   Ranger'  Gandalf
 replies 'indignantly':                                                       
                                                                             
           'Only a Ranger! Many of the Rangers are of the same race,          
 and  the  followers  of  Aragorn:  all that  he has  left of  the realm  of .
 his  fathers.  We  may  need  his  help   before  all   is  over.   We  have:
 reached Rivendell; but the Ring is not yet at rest.'                         
                                                                             
  From this point to the end  of section  'I' of  the manuscript  the 'third
 phase'  text  was  little  changed, and  the differences  from FR  noted in
 VI.363 - 6 were mostly  still present.  Gandalf's words  'And the  Elves of
 Rivendell  are  descendants  of his  chief foes'  (VI.364) were  changed to
 'And  among  the  Elves  of  Rivendell  are some  descendants of  his chief
 foes', and 'the Wise say  that he  [the Dark  Lord] is  doomed in  the End,
 though  that  is  far  away' (ibid.)  was removed.  Also removed  of course
 were  the  references  to  Odo's  arrival,  and when  Frodo goes  down with
 Sam to find his friends in  the porch  Odo's remarks  are given  to Pippin.
 The  sentence  describing   Elrond's  smile   and  laughter   (VI.365)  was
 struck  out,  and  Gloin's  wink  (VI.366)  also  disappears: his  reply to
 Frodo's   question  concerning   his  errand   from  the   Lonely  Mountain
 now takes the form it has in FR (p. 240).                                    
  In  section  'II'  of  the manuscript  (see p.  81), beginning  at Frodo's
 question 'And what has  become of  Balin and  Ori and  Oin?', the  text of

  FR  (pp.  241  ff.) was  very largely  reached (apart  from the  absence of
  Arwen), and there are only a few particular points to notice.             
     When in the first draft (VI. 392) Bilbo said 'I shall  have to  get that
  fellow  Peregrin to  help me',  he now  says the  same of  Aragorn, changed
  in  the  act  of  writing to  Tarkil (in  FR, the  Dunadan). At  this stage
  Aragorn's absence  from the  feast was  still explained  by his  being much
  in demand in the kitchens.                                                
     I noted that in the original draft 'the entire passage (FR pp. 243  - 4)
  in  which  Bilbo  tells  [Frodo] of  his journey  to Dale,  of his  life in
  Rivendell, and  his interest  in the  Ring -  and the  distressing incident
  when he asks to see it - is  absent.' In  this version  Bilbo does  give an
  account of his journey, but it was at first different from what he  says in
 - FR:                                                                      
                                                                           
  When  he  had left  Hobbiton he  had wandered  off aimlessly              
  along the Road, but somehow he had steered all the  time for              
  Rivendell.                                                                
     'I got here in a month or two without much adventure,' he              
  said, 'and I stayed at The Pony in Bree for a bit;(4) somehow I              
  have never gone any further. I have almost finished my book.              
  And I make up a few songs which they sing occasionally...'                
                                                                           
  This  was  changed,  probably  soon,  to  the  text of  FR, in  which Bilbo
  tells of  his journey  to Dale.  The rest  of the  passage, in  which Bilbo
  speaks  of  Gandalf  and the  Ring, was  present in  this version  from the
  start,  the  only  differences  being  that  Bilbo  names  the Necromancer,
  not the Enemy, and where in  FR he  says that  he could  get little  out of
  Gandalf  concerning  the   Ring  but   that  'the   Dunadan  has   told  me
  more',  here he  calls him  Tarkil, and  adds 'He  was in  the Gollum-hunt'
  (this being afterwards struck out).                                       
     The episode of Bilbo's asking to see the Ring is present  as in  FR, the
  only  difference  here  being  that  where  FR  has  'When he  had dressed,
  Frodo found  that while  he slept  the Ring  had been  hung about  his neck
  on  a  new  chain, light  but strong',  this version  has 'When  he dressed
  Frodo had hung the Ring upon a chain about his neck under his tunic.'     
     When  Aragorn  joins  Bilbo  and Frodo,  the conversation  is as  in FR,
  with  Tarkil  for  Dunadan,  the  Dunadan;  but  Bilbo's reply  to Frodo's
  'What do you call him Tarkil for?' is different:                          
                                                                           
     'Lots  of  us  do  here,'  answered  Bilbo,  'just   to  show   off  our
  knowledge  of  the  old  tongue,  and   to  show   our  deep   respect.  It
  means   Man   of    the   West,    out   of    Numenor,   you    know,   or
  perhaps  you  don't.  But  that  is  another  story.  He  can  tell  it you
  some  other  time.  Just   now  I   want  his   help.  Look   here,  friend
  Tarkil,  Elrond  says  this  song  of  mine  is to  be finished  before the
  end of the evening...'                                                    

                                        
                                                                        
 This was changed to:                                                    
                                                                        
  'He  is often  called that  here,' answered  Bilbo. 'It  is a  title of
 honour;   The   Elder  Tongue   is  remembered   in  Rivendell;   and  I
 thought   you   knew   enough   at   least  to   know  tarkil:   Man  of
 Westernesse,  Numenorean.  But   this  isn't   the  time   for  lessons.
 Just  now  I  want  your  Trotter's  help  in  something   urgent.  Look
 here, friend Tarkil...'(5)                                              
                                                                        
  The  passage  leading  up  to  Bilbo's  song  is  much  as  in  FR (pp.
 245 - 6), but the sentence beginning  'Almost it  seemed that  the words
 took shape...'  is absent,  and where  FR has  'the interwoven  words in
 elven-tongues' ('in the Elven-tongue', First Edition) this text has 'the
 interwoven words in the high elven-tongue'.                             
  The reception of the song moves close to the text of  FR (p.  249), but
 with  some differences.  No Elf  is individually  named (Lindir  in FR).
 From Bilbo's  words about  Men and  Hobbits -  'They're as  different as
 peas and apples' - this version has:                                    
                                                                        
  'No! - little peas and large peas!' said some. 'Their languages       
 all taste much the same to us, anyway,' said others.                    
  'I won't argue with you,' said Bilbo. 'I am sleepy after so            
 much music and singing. I'll leave you to guess, if you want to.'       
  'Well, we guess that you thought of the first two lines, and           
 Tarkil did all the rest for you,' they cried.                           
  'Wrong! Not even warm; stone cold, in fact!' said Bilbo with           
 a laugh. He got up and came towards Frodo.                              
  'Well, that's over!' he said in a low voice. 'It went off better       
 than I expected. I don't often get asked for a second hearing, for      
 any reason. As a matter of fact quite a lot of it was Tarkil's.'        
  'I'm not going to try and guess,' said Frodo, smiling. 'I was          
 half asleep when you began - it seemed to follow on from                
 something I was dreaming about, and I didn't realize it was,            
 really you who were speaking until near the end.'                       
                                                                        
  The chapter ends now as  it does  in FR,  except that  the old  form of
 the chant to Elbereth remains  (VI.394), and  the passage  following it,
 concerning Aragorn and Arwen, is of course absent.                      
                                                                        
                                    *                                    
                                                                        
  No  poem  of my  father's had  so long  and complex  a history  as that
 which he named Errantry. It issued ultimately  in two  entirely distinct
 poems, one of which was the song  that Bilbo  chanted at  Rivendell; and
 this is a convenient place to set out  fairly fully  the nature  of this
 divergence, this extraordinary shape-changing.                          

                                      
                                                                        
  My  father  described  the  origin and  nature of  Erranty in  a letter
 written  to  Donald  Swann  on  14  October  1966.  (Errantry  had  been
 published in The  Adventures of  Tom Bombadil  in 1962,  and it  was set
 to  music  by  Donald  Swann in  The Road  Goes Ever  On, 1967:  see his
 remarks on the poem in his  foreword to  that book.)  In this  letter my
 father said:                                                            
                                                                        
   With  regard  to  Errantry: I  am most  interested in  your suggestion.
  I wonder if it is  not too  long for  such an  arrangement? I  looked to
  see  if  it  could  be abbreviated;  but its  metrical scheme,  with its
  trisyllabic near-rhymes, makes this very  difficult. It  is of  course a
  piece of  verbal acrobatics  and metrical  high-jinks; and  was intended
  for recitation with great  variations of  speed. It  needs a  reciter or
  chanter  capable  of  producing  the  words with  great clarity,  but in
  places  with  great  rapidity.  The  'stanzas'  as printed  indicate the
  speed-groups.  In  general  these  were  meant  to  begin  at  speed and
  slow  down.  Except  the  last  group,  which was  to begin  slowly, and
  pick  up  at  errand  too!  and  end   at  high   speed  to   match  the
  beginning.(6) Also  of course  the reciter  was supposed  at once  to begin
  repeating  (at  even  higher  speed)  the  beginning,   unless  somebody
  cried 'Once is enough'.(7)                                             
   The  piece has  had a  curious history.  It was  begun very  many years
  ago, in  an attempt  to go  on with  the model  that came  unbidden into
  my mind: the first six lines, in which, I guess, D'ye  ken the  rhyme to
  porringer had a part.(8) Later  I read  it to  an undergraduate  club that
  used to  hear its  members read  unpublished poems  or short  tales, and
  voted  some  of  them  into  the  minute  book.  They invented  the name
  Inklings, and not  I or  Lewis, though  we were  among the  few 'senior'
  members.  (The  club  lasted  the  usual  year  or two  of undergraduate
  societies;  and  the  name  became transferred  to the  circle of  C. S.
  Lewis when only he and I were left  of it.)(9) It was  at this  point that
  Errantry  began  its  travels,  starting  with  a  typed copy,  and con-
  tinuing by oral memory and transmission, as I later discovered.        
                                                                        
  The  earliest  version  that my  father retained  is a  rough pencilled
 manuscript  without  title:  there  were certainly  preliminary workings
 behind it, now lost, since this text was set down without hesitations or
 corrections, but it seems very probable that  it was  in fact  the first
 complete text of the poem, possibly that from  which he  read it  to the
 original 'Inklings' in the early  1930s. The  page has  many alterations
 and suggestions leading to the second version, but I give it here  as it
 was first set down.                                                     
                                                                        
           There was a merry passenger,                                  
           a messenger, an errander;                                     
           he took a tiny porringer                                      
           and oranges for provender;                                    

        he took a little grasshopper                                   
        and harnessed her to carry him;                                
        he chased a little butterfly                                   
        that fluttered by, to marry him.                               
        He made him wings of taffeta                                   
        to laugh at her and catch her with;                            
        he made her shoes of beetle-skin                               
        with needles in to latch them with.                            
        They fell to bitter quarrelling,                               
        and sorrowing he fled away;                                    
        and long he studied sorcery                                    
        in Ossory a many day.                                          
        He made a shield and morion                                    
        of coral and of ivory;                                         
        he made a spear of emerald                                     
        and glimmered all in bravery;                                  
        a sword he made of malachite                                   
        and stalactite, and brandished it,                             
        he went and fought the dragon-fly                              
        called wag-on-high and vanquished it.                          
        He battled with the Dumbledores,                               
        and bumbles all, and honeybees,                                
        and won the golden honey-comb,                                 
        and running home on sunny seas,                                
        in ship of leaves and gossamer                                 
        with blossom for a canopy,                                     
        he polished up and burnished up                                
        and furbished up his panoply.                                  
        He tarried for a little while                                  
        in little isles, and plundered them;                           
        and webs of all the attercops                                  
        he shattered, cut, and sundered them.                          
        And coming home with honey-comb                                
        and money none - remembered it,                                
        his message and his errand too!                                
        His derring-do had hindered it.(10)                               
                                                                      
  Among my father's papers are five further texts, all titled Errantry,
 before the poem's publication in The Oxford Magazine, Vol. LII  no. 5,
 9 November 1933, which I  give here.  In fact,  the form  published in
 1933 was virtually achieved already in the second version,  apart only
 from  the  beginning, which  went through  several stages  of develop-
 ment: these are given at the end of the Oxford Magazine version.      
                                                                      
        There was a merry passenger                                    
        a messenger, a mariner:                                        
        he built a gilded gondola                                      

 to wander in, and had in her        
 a load of yellow oranges            
 and porridge for his provender;     
 he perfumed her with marjoram       
 and cardamom and lavender.          
                                    
 He called the winds of argosies     
 with cargoes in to carry him        
 across the rivers seventeen         
 that lay between to tarry him.      
                                    
 He landed all in loneliness         
 where stonily the pebbles on        
 the running river Derrilyn          
 goes merrily for ever on.           
 He wandered over meadow-land        
 to shadow-land and dreariness,      
 and under hill and over hill,       
 a rover still to weariness.         
                                    
 He sat and sang a melody            
 his errantry a-tarrying;            
 he begged a pretty butterfly        
 that fluttered by to marry him.     
 She laughed at him, deluded him,
 eluded him unpitying;               
 so long he studied wizardry         
 and sigaldry and smithying.         
                                    
 He wove a tissue airy-thin          
 to snare her in; to follow in       
 he made a beetle-leather wing       
 and feather wing and swallow-wing.
 He caught her in bewilderment       
 in filament of spider-thread;       
 he built a little bower-house,      
 a flower house, to hide her head;
 he made her shoes of diamond        
 on fire and a-shimmering;           
 a boat he built her marvellous,     
 a carvel all a-glimmering;          
 he threaded gems in necklaces -     
 and recklessly she squandered them,
 as fluttering, and wavering,        
 and quavering, they wandered on.
                                    
 They fell to bitter quarrelling;
 and sorrowing he sped away,         

 on  windy  weather wearily           
 and drearily he fled away.           
                                     
 He passed the archipelagoes          
 where yellow grows the marigold,     
 where countless silver fountains are,
 and mountains are of fairy-gold.     
 He took to war and foraying          
 a-harrying beyond the sea,           
 a-roaming over Belmarie              
 and Thellamie and Fantasie.          
                                     
 He made a shield and morion          
 of coral and of ivory,               
 a sword he made of emerald,          
 and terrible his rivalry             
 with all the knights of Aerie        
 and Faerie and Thellamie.            
 Of crystal was his habergeon,        
 his scabbard of chalcedony,          
 his javelins were of malachite       
 and stalactite - he brandished them,
 and went and fought the dragon-flies
 of Paradise, and vanquished them.
                                     
 He battled with  the Dumbledores,
 the  Bumbles, and  the Honeybees,
 and  won  the  Golden  Honeycomb;
 and  running  home on  sunny seas
 in  ship  of leaves  and gossamer
 with   blossom   for   a  canopy,
 he polished up, and furbished up,
 and burnished up his panoply.        
                                     
 He tarried for a little while        
 in little isles, and plundered them;
 and webs of all the Attercops        
 he shattered them and sundered them -
 Then, coming home with honeycomb     
 and money none, to memory            
 his message came and errand too!     
 In derring-do and glamoury           
 he had forgot them, journeying,      
 and tourneying, a wanderer.          
                                     
 So now he must  depart again         
 and start again his gondola,         
 for ever still a messenger,          

            a passenger, a tarrier,                                   
            a-roving as a feather does,                               
            a  weather-driven  mariner.(11)                           
                                                                     
                 In the second version the poem began thus:           
                                                                     
            There was a merry messenger,                              
            a passenger, an errander;                                 
            he gathered yellow oranges                                
            in porringer for provender;                               
            he built a gilded gondola                                 
            a-wandering to carry him                                  
            across the rivers seventeen                               
            that lay between to tarry him.                            
                                                                     
            He landed there in loneliness                             
            in stoniness on shingle steep,                            
            and ventured into meadow-land                             
            and shadow-land, and dingle deep.                         
                                                                     
            He sat and sang a melody, &c.                            
                                                                     
 The poem otherwise, as I have said, scarcely differs from the Oxford
 Magazine version; but the last four lines were:                       
                                                                     
            for ever still a-tarrying,                                
            a mariner, a messenger,                                   
            a-roving as a feather does,                               
            a weather-driven passenger.(12)                           
                                                                     
 The third version reached the opening of  the published  form, except
 that it began 'There was a merry messenger, a passenger, a mariner',
 and retained the lines                                               
                                                                     
            He landed all in loneliness                               
            in stoniness on shingle steep,                            
            and wandered off to meadowland,                           
            to shadowland, to dingle deep.                            
                                                                     
 The fourth version reached the published form except in this third
 verse, which now read:                                               
                                                                     
            He landed all in loneliness                               
            where stonily on shingle go                               
            the running rivers Lerion                                 
            and Derion in dingle low.                                 
            He wandered over meadow-land                              
            to shadow-land and dreariness, Rc.                        
                                                                     
  Rayner Unwin mentioned in a letter to my father of 20 June 1952     
 that he had received an enquiry from someone unnamed about a poem

                                              
                                                                             
 called  Errantry,  'which  made such  a deep  impression on  him that  he is
 most  anxious  to  trace  it  again.'  To  this my  father replied  (22 June
 1952, Letters no. 133):                                                      
                                                                             
   As  for  'Errantry':  it is  a most  odd coincidence  that you  should ask
   about  that.  For  only  a  few  weeks  ago  I  had a  letter from  a lady
   unknown  to  me  making  a  similar enquiry.  She said  that a  friend had
   recently  written  out  for  her  from  memory  some  verses  that  had so
   taken  her  fancy that  she was  determined to  discover their  origin. He
   had  picked  them  up  from  his  son-in-law  who  had  learned   them  in
   Washington  D.C.   (!);  but   nothing  was   known  about   their  source
   save  a vague  idea that  they were  connected with  English universities.
   Being   a   determined   person   she   apparently   applied   to  various
   Vice-Chancellors,  and  Bowra (13) directed  her  to  my  door.  I  must  say
   that  I was  interested in  becoming 'folk-lore'.  Also it  was intriguing
   to  get  an  oral  version -  which bore  out my  views on  oral tradition
   (at  any  rate  in  early  stages):  sc.  that the  'hard words'  are well
   preserved,(14) and  the  more  common  words  altered,  but  the   metre  is
   often disturbed.                                                           
                                                                             
 In  this  letter  he  referred  to  two  versions  of  Errantry,  an  'A.V.'
 ('Authorised  Version'),  this  being  the  Oxford  Magazine  text,  and  an
 'R.V.'  ('Revised Version').  The 'R.V.',  in which  substantial alterations
 were  made  to  the  'A.V.',  is  the  text published  in The  Adventures of
 Tom  Bombadil  ten  years  later. -  He also  said in  this letter  that the
 poem was                                                                     
                                                                             
   in  a   metre  I   invented  (depending   on  trisyllabic   assonances  or
   near-assonances,  which  is  so  difficult  that   except  in   this  one
   example I have never been able to use it  again -  it just  blew out  in a
   single impulse).                                                           
                                                                             
 On this Humphrey Carpenter remarked (Letters p. 443):                        
                                                                             
   It  may  appear  at a  first glance  that Tolkien  did write  another poem
   in  this  metre,  'Earendil  was  a  mariner',  which  appears in  Book II
   Chapter  1  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings.  But  this  poem is  arguably a
   development of 'Errantry' rather than a separate composition.              
                                                                             
 That this is true will be seen  from the  earlier forms  of Bilbo's  song at
 Rivendell.                                                                   
                                                                             
                                      *                                      
                                                                             
 There  are  no  less  than fifteen  manuscript and  typescript texts  of the
 'Rivendell  version',  and  these  may  be  divided  into  two   groups:  an
 earlier,  in  which  the  poem  begins  with  the line  There was  a merry
 messenger  (or in  one case  a variant  of it),  and a  later, in  which the
 poem  begins  Earendel  was  a  mariner (the  name being  spelt thus  in all
 texts). The textual history of the first  group is  very complex  in detail,

 and difficult to unravel with certainty owing to the  fact that  my father
 hesitated  back  and  forth  between  competing  readings   in  successive
 texts.                                                                     
   In  the  earliest  text  of all  the poem  was still  in the  process of
 emergence. The opening lines are here  particularly interesting,  for they
 remain so close to  the first  verse of  Errantry as  to be  scarcely more
 than a variant:                                                            
                                                                           
                    There was a merry messenger                             
                    a passenger a mariner:                                  
                    he built a boat and gilded her,                         
                    and silver oars he fashioned her;                       
                    he perfumed her with marjoram                           
                    and cardamon (15) and lavender,                             
                    and laded her with oranges                              
                    and porridge for his provender.                         
                                                                           
 Earendel  is  hardly present  here! Yet  this initial  text at  once moves
 away from Errantry, and the  new poem  in its  first 'phase'  was already
 quite  largely  achieved  in this  manuscript. It  was followed,  no doubt
 immediately, by the version  that I  print below.  It is  indeed extremely
 difficult and even unreal to delimit  'versions' in  such cases,  where my
 father  was  refining  and  enlarging  the poem  in a  continuous process;
 but this second text was originally set down as if in a finished and final
 form, and in this form I give it here.(16)                                 
                                                                           
               There was a gallant passenger                                
               a messenger, a mariner:                                      
               he built a boat and gilded her                               
               and silver oars he fashioned her;                            
               her sails he wove of gossamer                                
               and blossom of the cherry-tree,                              
               and lightly as a feather                                     
               in the weather went she merrily.                         8
                                                                           
               He floated from a haven fair                                 
               of maiden-hair and everfern;                                 
               the waterfalls he proudly rode                               
               where loudly flowed the Merryburn;                           
               and dancing on the foam he went                              
               on roving bent for ever on,                                  
               from Evermorning journeying,                                 
               while murmuring the River on                              16
               to valleys in the gloaming ran;                              
               and slowly then on pillow cool                               
               he laid his head, and fast asleep                            
               he passed the Weepingwillow Pool.                            

                             
                                               
 The windy reeds were whispering,               
 and mists were in the meadow-land,             
 and down the River hurried him                 
 and carried him to Shadowland.               24
                                               
 The Sea beside a stony shore                   
 there lonely roared, and under Moon            
 a wind arose and wafted him                    
 a castaway beyond the Moon.                    
                                               
 He woke again forlorn afar                     
 by shores that are without a name,             
 and by the Shrouded Island o'er                
 the Silent Water floating came.              32
                                               
 He passed the archipelagoes                    
 where yellow grows the marigold,               
 and landed on the Elven-strands                
 of silver sand and fallow gold,                
 beneath the Hill of Ilmarin                    
 where glimmer in a valley sheer                
 the lights of Elven Tirion,                    
 the city on the Shadowmere.                  40
                                               
 He tarried there his errantry,                 
 and melodies they taught to him,               
 and lays of old, and marvels told,             
 and harps of gold they brought to him.         
 Of glamoury he tidings heard,                  
 and binding words of sigaldry;                 
 of wars they spoke with Enemies                
 that venom used and wizardry.               48
                                               
 In panoply of Elvenkings,                      
 in silver rings they armoured him;             
 his shield they writ with elven-runes,         
 that never wound did harm to him.              
 His bow was made of dragon-horn,               
 his arrows shorn of ebony,                     
 of woven steel his habergeon,                  
 his scabbard of chalcedony.                 56
 His sword was hewn of adamant,                 
 and valiant the might of it;                   
 his helm a shining emerald,                    
 and terrible the light of it.                  
                                               
 His boat anew for him they built               
 of timber felled in Elvenhome;                 
 upon the mast a star was set,                  

 its spars were wet with silver foam;           64
 and wings of swans they made for it,              
 and laid on it a mighty doom                      
 to sail the seas of wind and come                 
 where glimmering runs the gliding moon.(17)       
                                                  
 From Evereven's lofty hills,                      
 where softly spill the fountains tall,            
 he passed away, a wandering light                 
 beyond the mighty Mountain-wall;                72
 and unto Evernight he came,                       
 and like a flaming star he fell:                   
 his javelins of diamond                           
 as fire into the darkness fell.                   
 Ungoliant abiding there                           
 in Spider-lair her thread entwined;               
 for endless years a gloom she spun                
 the Sun and Moon in web to wind.(18)            80
                                                  
 His sword was like a flashing light               
 as flashing bright he smote with it;               
 he shore away her poisoned neb,                  
 her noisome webs he broke with it.                
 Then shining as a risen star                      
 from prison bars he sped away,                    
 and borne upon a blowing wind                     
 on flowing wings he fled away.                  88
                                                  
 To Evernoon at last he came,                      
 and passed the flame-encircled hill,               
 where wells of gold for Melineth                  
 her never-resting workers build.                  
 His eyes with fire ablaze were set,               
 his face was lit with levin-light;                
 and turning to his home afar,                     
 a roaming star at even-light                    96
 on high above the mists he came,                  
 a distant flame, a marineer                       
 on winds unearthly swiftly borne,                 
 uplifted o'er the Shadowmere.                     
 He passed o'er Carakilian,                        
 where Tirion the Hallowed stands;                 
 the sea far under loudly roared                   
 on cloudy shores in Shadowland.                104
                                                  
 And.  over  Evermorn   he  passed,                
 and  saw at  last the  haven fair,                
 far under by the Merry-burn                       

      in everfern and maidenhair.                                       
      But on him mighty doom was laid,                                  
      till moon should fade and all the stars,                          
      to pass, and tarry never more                                     
      on hither shore where mortals are,                          112
      for ever still a passenger,                                       
      a messenger, to never rest,                                       
      to bear his burning lamp afar,                                    
      the Flammifer of Westernesse.                                     
                                                                       
 The chief changes introduced on this manuscript were in lines 14-17,
 altered to read:                                                       
                                                                       
      on  roving bent  from hitherland,                                 
      from Evermorning   journeying,                                 
      while  murmuring  the  River  ran                                 
      to valleys in the Gloaming fields                                 
                                                                       
 and in lines 93 - 6, which were rewritten and extended thus:           
                                                                       
      The seven-branched Levin-tree                                     
      on Heavenfield he shining saw                                     
      upflowering from its writhen root;                                
      a living fruit of fire it bore.                                   
      The lightning in his face was lit,                                
      ablaze were set his tresses wan,                                  
      his eyes with levin-beams were bright,                            
      and gleaming white his vessel shone.                              
                                                                       
      From World's End then he turned away                              
      and yearned again to seek afar                                    
      his land beneath the morning light                                
      and burning like a beacon star                                    
      (on high above the mists he came, &c.)                            
                                                                       
 The seven-branched Levin-tree was  first everbranching,  and it  bore a
 living fruit of light.                                                 
 The third version was  that in  the text  of 'Many  Meetings' described
 at the  beginning of  this chapter.  The pages  in that  manuscript (at
 Marquette)  bearing  the  poem have  been lost,  but Taum  Santoski has
 provided me with a transcription of the pages that  he made  before the
 loss occurred. This text was remarkably close to the second version (as
 emended)  printed  above.  The  opening  now  returns  to  There  was a
 merry  messenger;(19) from  Evermorning  in   line  15   becomes  through
 Evermorning;  the  Weepingwillow  Pool  in  line  20  becomes  Pools (a
 return to the earliest workings); and lines 67-8 become:               
                                                                       
      to sail the windy skies and come                                  
      behind the Sun and light of Moon.                                 

   This, then, was the form at the time we have reached.  It will  be seen
 that  in  this  poem  the  Merry Messenger,  the Passenger,  the Mariner,
 'changes shape' and emerges as the figure of Earendel  (though he  is not
 named). At the beginning he dances  on the  foam in  his boat  with sails
 of  gossamer  and blossom  of the  cherry-tree, and  he still  passed the
 archipelagoes  where  yellow  grows the  marigold, but  he is  drawn into
 the gravity of the myth and mighty doom is  laid on  him; the  dance dies
 out of the verse, and he ends as the Flammifer  of Westernesse.  There is
 no question now of returning to the  beginning, even  though the  fate of
 Earendel  remains  that  of  the  Merry  Messenger:  for  ever   still  a
 passenger, a messenger, to never rest...                                 
   Many  years later  my father  ingeniously related  the two  poems thus,
 in  the  Preface  to  The  Adventures   of  Tom   Bombadil  -   when  the
 Earendel version was of course that given in FR:                         
                                                                         
   [Errantry]  was  evidently  made  by  Bilbo.  This  is  indicated  by its
   obvious  relationship  to  the  long poem  recited by  Bilbo, as  his own
   composition, in the house  of Elrond.  In origin  a 'nonsense  rhyme', it
   is  in  the  Rivendell  version  found  transformed  and  applied,  some-
   what  incongruously,  to  the  High-elvish  and  Numenorean   legends  of
   Earendil.  Probably  because  Bilbo  invented  its  metrical  devices and
   was  proud  of  them.  They  do  not appear  in other  pieces in  the Red
   Book.  The  older  form,  here  given,  must  belong  to  the  early days
   after Bilbo's return  from his  journey. Though  the influence  of Elvish
   traditions is seen, they are not  seriously treated,  and the  names used
   (Derrilyn,  Thellamie,  Belmarie,  Aerie)  are  mere  inventions  in  the
   Elvish style, and are not in fact Elvish at all.                       
                                                                         
 Yet the places of Earendel's journey in this first phase of the Rivendell
 version  are  not  by  any means  entirely identifiable  in terms  of The
 Silmarillion.  Was  his journey  to the  Sea a  journey down  Sirion? Are
 the  Weepingwillow  Pools  Nan-tathren,  the  Land  of  Willows?  Or are
 they still 'mere inventions in the Silmarillion style'?  And what  of the
 seven-branched  Levin-tree  on  Heavenfield,  and the  wells of  gold for
 Melineth that  her never-resting  workers build?  These certainly  do not
 suggest 'mere invention' like Thellamie or Derrilyn.                     
   Some names are in any case clear in their reference: as Tirion  (in the
 Quenta  Silmarillion  still  named  Tun or  Tuna, upon  the hill  of Kor),
 Carakilian (in the Quenta Silmarillion  in the  form Kalakilya,  the Pass
 of Light). The Hill of  Ilmarin (a  name not  met before)  is Taniquetil,
 and the mighty  Mountain-wall is  the Pelori,  the Mountains  of Valinor.
 The  Shadowmere  perhaps  looks  back  to  the  'shadowy  arm  of water',
 the 'slender water fringed  with white',  which is  described in  the old
 tale  of  The  Coming  of  the  Elves  (I.122).  The  Shrouded  Island is
 perhaps  the Lonely  Isle: it  was subsequently  changed to  the Shrouded
 Islands, but  then became  the Lonely  Island before  the line  was lost.
 That Earendel slew Ungoliant  'in the  South' is  recorded in  the Sketch

 of  the  Mythology  (IV.38),   and  in   the  Quenta   Noldorinwa  (IV.149
 152); cf. also the very early notes on Earendel's voyages, II.254, 261.(20)
   But  the legend  of Earendel  as found  in the  existing sources  is not
 present  here.(21) Indeed,  it  seems as  if he  arose unbidden  and unlooked
 for  as  my  father  wrote this  new version  of the  poem: for  how could
 Earendel  be  called a  merry messenger?  Years later,  in the  Preface to
 The  Adventures  of  Tom  Bombadil  just  cited,  my father  described the
 transformation  as  'somewhat  incongruous'  -  and  he  was  then  refer-
 ring  of  course to  the form  of the  poem in  FR, where  the transforma-
 tion had gone far  deeper than  in the  present version.  Yet there  was a
 'congruity'  that  made  this original  transformation possible,  and even
 natural. Behind both figures lay the  sustaining idea  of the  wanderer, a
 restless spirit who seeks back  to the  places of  his origin,  but cannot
 escape the  necessity of  passing on.  At this  stage therefore  we should
 not,  I  believe,  try to  determine where  was Evernoon,  or to  give any
 other name to                                                             
                                       the haven fair,                     
                                                                          
                      far under by the Merry-burn                          
                      in everfern and maidenhair.                          
                                                                          
 They  belong  to  the same  geography as  the archipelagoes  where yellow
 grows the marigold.                                                       
                                                                          
   Following the third  version, lost  but happily  not unknown,  there are
 six  further  texts  in  the 'Merry  Messenger' phase.  Five of  these are
 typescripts that can be readily placed in order. The sixth is  a beautiful
 small manuscript, written on four slips of paper the last of which  is the
 back  of  a  letter addressed  to my  father and  dated 13  December 1944.
 Precisely  where  the  manuscript comes  in this  series is  not perfectly
 clear, but it seems most likely to have preceded the first typescript.(22)
 Thus there was an interval of several  years between  the first  three and
 the next six texts. Progressive emendation of these  gave a  final version
 in this 'phase':                                                          
                                                                          
                There was a merry messenger,                               
                a passenger, a mariner:                                    
                he built a boat and gilded her,                            
                and silver oars he fashioned her;                          
                her sails he wove of gossamer                              
                and blossom of the cherry-tree                             
                and lightly as a feather in                                
                the weather went she merrily.                             8
                                                                          
                He floated from a haven fair                               
                of maidenhair and ladyfern;                                
                the waterfalls he proudly rode                             
                where loudly flowed the Merryburn;                         
                and dancing on the foam he went                            

 on roving bent from Hitherland                
 through Evermorning journeying,               
 while murmuring the river ran              16
 to valleys in the Gloaming-fields;            
 then slowly he on pillow cool                 
 let fall his head, and fast asleep            
 he passed the Weeping-willow Pools.           
                                              
 The windy reeds were whispering,              
 and mists were in the meadowland,             
 and down the river hurried him,               
 and carried him to Shadowland.             24
 He heard there moan in stony caves            
 the lonely waves; there roaring blows         
 the mighty wind of Tarmenel.                  
 By paths that seldom mortal goes              
 his boat it wafted pitiless                   
 with bitter breath across the grey            
 and long-forsaken seas distressed;            
 from East to West he passed away.          32
                                              
 Through Evernight then borne afar             
 by waters dark beyond the Day                 
 he saw the Lonely Island rise                 
 where twilight lies upon the Bay              
 of Valinor, of Elvenhome,                     
 and ever-foaming billows roll;                
 he landed on the elven-strands                
 of silver sand and yellow gold             40
 beneath the Hill of Ilmarin,                  
 where glimmer in a valley sheer               
 the lights of towering Tirion,                
 the city on the Shadowmere.                   
                                              
 He tarried there from errantry,               
 and melodies they taught to him,              
 and lays of old and marvels told,             
 and harps of gold they brought to him.     48
 Of glamoury he tidings heard,                 
 and binding words of wizardry;                
 they spoke of wars with Enemies               
 that venom used and sigaldry.                 
                                              
 In panoply of Elven-kings,                    
 in silver rings they armoured him;            
 his shield they writ with elven-runes         
 that never wound did harm to him.         56
 His bow was made of dragon-horn,              

 his arrows shorn of ebony,                   
 of mithril was his habergeon,                
 his scabbard of chalcedony.                  
 His sword of steel was valiant;              
 of adamant his helm was wrought,             
 an argent wing of swan his crest;            
 upon his breast an emerald.             64
                                             
 His boat anew they built for him             
 of timber felled in Elvenhome;               
 upon the mast a star was set,                
 her spars were wet with driven foam;         
 and eagle-wings they made for her,           
 and laid on her a mighty doom,               
 to sail the windy skies and come             
 behind the Sun and light of Moon.       72 
                                             
 From Evereven's lofty hills,                 
 where softly silver fountains fall,          
 he passed away a wandering light             
 beyond the mighty Mountain Wall.             
 From World's End then he turned away,        
 and yearned again to seek afar               
 his land beneath the morning-light;          
 and burning like a beacon-star          80 .
 on high above the mists he came,             
 a distant flame, a marineer,                 
 on winds unearthly swiftly borne,            
 uplifted o'er the Shadowmere.                
                                             
 He passed o'er Calacirian,                   
 where Tirion the hallowed stands;            
 the Sea below him loudly roared              
 on cloudy shores in Shadowland;         88
 and over Evermorn he passed                  
 and saw at last the haven fair               
 far under by the Merryburn                   
 in ladyfern and maidenhair.                  
                                             
 But on him mighty doom was laid,             
 till Moon should fade, an orbed star         
 to pass and tarry never more                 
 on Hither Shores where mortals are;     96
 for ever still a passenger,                  
 a messenger, to never rest,                  
 to bear the burning lamp afar,               
 the Flammifer of Westernesse.                

                                                    
                                                                          
  The  major  change  in  the  poem,  rendering  it  substantially  shorter
 than  before,  had  come  about  in  two  stages.  By  emendation  to  the
 second of these typescripts the original lines 25 - 8 (p. 92) became:     
                                                                          
            The Sea beside a stony shore                                   
            there lonely roared; and wrathful rose                         
            a wind on high in Tarmenel,                                    
            by paths that seldom mortal goes                               
            on flying wings it passed away,                                
            and wafted him beyond the grey                                 
            and long-forsaken seas distressed                              
            from East or West that sombre lay.                             
                                                                          
 In  this  text  the  remainder  of   the  poem   was  unaffected   by  any
 important  changes,  and  remained  close  to the  original form  (with of
 course  the  alterations  given  on  p.  94).  In  the  last two  of these
 typescripts,  however,  a  new  form  of  lines 25  ff. entered,  as given
 above:  He  heard  there  moan  in  stony  caves,  &c.(23) Now  Evernight is
 named  at  this point,  and at  the same  time the  entire section  of the
 poem in  the existing  text from  line 73  and unto  Evernight he  came to
 From  World's  End  then  he  turned  away  (pp. 93  - 4)  was eliminated,
 with  the  disappearance  of  Ungoliant  and  the  mysterious   scenes  of
 Evernoon, the 'Tree of Lightning' with its seven  branches and  the wells
 of gold for Melineth in the flame-encircled hill.                         
                                                                          
  While I certainly do not know this as  a fact,  I think  that there  is a
 strong  presumption that  there was  a further  long interval  between the
 'Merry  Messenger'  versions  and  the  second  group  beginning  Earendel
 was a mariner.                                                            
  The first text of this group, which I will for convenience call A, I give
 in full. It will be seen that while it  advances far  towards the  poem in
 FR,  much  is  retained  from  the  preceding  version,  and  notably  the
 arming of  Earendel (In  panoply of  Elven-kings..., p.  97 lines  53 ff.)
 stands in its former place, during his sojourn  in Tirion,  and not  as in
 FR at the beginning of his great voyage.                                  
                                                                          
            Earendel was a mariner                                         
            that tarried in Arvernien;                                     
            he built a boat of timber felled                               
            in Nimbrethil to journey in;                                   
            her sails he wove of silver fair                               
            of silver were her lanterns made,                              
            her prow he fashioned like a swan,                             
            and light upon her banners laid.                             8
                                                                          
            Beneath the moon and under star                                
            he wandered far from northern strands,                         

    
                                            
 bewildered on enchanted ways                
 beyond the days of mortal lands.            
 From gnashing of the Narrow Ice             
 where shadow lies on frozen hills,          
 from nether heat and burning waste          
 he turned in haste, and roving still   16
 on starless waters far astray               
 at last he came to night of Naught,         
 and passed, and never sight he saw          
 of shining shore nor light he sought.       
 The winds of wrath came driving him,        
 and blindly in the foam he fled              
 from West to East, and errandless,          
 unheralded he homeward sped.           24
                                            
 As bird then Elwing came to him,            
 and flame was in her carcanet,               
 more bright than light of diamond           
 was fire that on her heart was set.         
 The Silmaril she bound on him               
 and crowned him with a living light,        
 and dauntless then with burning brow        
 he turned his prow, and in the night   32 
 from otherworld beyond the Sea              
 there strong and free a storm arose,        
 a wind of power in Tarmenel;                
 by paths that seldom mortal goes            
 his boat it bore with mighty breath         
 as driving death across the grey            
 and long-forsaken seas distressed;          
 from East to West he passed away.      40
                                            
 Through Evernight then borne afar           
 by waters dark beyond the Day,              
 he saw the Lonely Island rise,              
 where twilight lies upon the Bay            
 of Valinor, of Elvenhome,                   
 and ever-foaming billows roll.              
 He landed on forbidden strands               
 of silver sand and yellow gold;        48
 beneath the Hill of Ilmarin                 
 a-glimmer in a valley sheer                 
 the lamps of towering Tirion                
 were mirrored on the Shadowmere.            
                                            
 He tarried there from errantry              
 and melodies they taught to him,            

 and lays of old and marvels told,             
 and harps of gold they brought to him.    56
 In panoply of Elven-kings,                    
 in serried rings they armoured him;           
 his shield they writ with elven-runes         
 that never wound did harm to him,             
 his bow was made of dragon-horn,              
 his arrows shorn of ebony,                    
 of silver was his habergeon,                  
 his scabbard of chalcedony;               64
 his sword of steel was valiant,               
 of adamant his helmet tall,                   
 an argent flame upon his crest,               
 upon his breast an emerald.                   
                                              
 His boat anew they built for him              
 of mithril and of elven-glass;                
 the Silmaril was hanging bright               
 as lantern light on slender mast;         72
 and eagle-wings they made for her,            
 and laid on her a mighty doom,                
 to sail the shoreless skies and come          
 behind the Sun and light of Moon.             
                                              
 From Evereven's lofty hills,                  
 where softly silver fountains fall,           
 he rose on high, a wandering light            
 beyond the mighty Mountain Wall.          80
 From World's End then he turned away,         
 and yearned again to seek afar                
 his land beneath the morning-light,           
 and burning like a beacon-star                
 on high above the mists he came,              
 a distant flame, a marineer,                  
 on winds unearthly swiftly borne,             
 uplifted o'er the Shadowmere.             88
                                              
 He passed o'er Calacirian                     
 where Tirion the hallowed stands;             
 the sea below him loudly roared               
 on cloudy shores in Shadowland;               
 and over Middle-earth he passed,              
 and heard at last the weeping sore            
 of women and of Elven-maids                   
 in Elder Days, in years of yore.           96
                                              
 But on him mighty doom was laid,              
 till Moon should fade, an orbed star,         

       to pass, and tarry never more                                     
       on Hither Shores where mortals are;                               
       for ever still on errand, as                                      
       a herald that should never rest,                                  
       to bear his shining lamp afar,                                    
       the Flammifer of Westernesse.                                 104
                                                                        
  The  next text  (B) is  a typescript  of A,  but introduces  some minor
 changes that were retained in  the FR  version (his  boat it  bore with
 biting breath/as might of death 37 -  8, the  lamplit towers  of Tirion
 51), and line  25 is  here Bird-Elwing  thither came  to him.  My father
 then  used  this  typescript  B  as the  vehicle for  massive rewriting,
 including the movement of the 'arming of Earendel' to its later place as
 the  second  stanza.  A new  typescript (C)(24) was made  incorporating all
 this, and  the form  of the  poem in  FR was  now virtually  achieved; a
 very few further minor changes were made, and entered on this text.(25) 
 Careful  examination  of  these texts  shows the  development from  A to
 the published form with perfect clarity.                                
  But the history of this, perhaps the most protean, in its scale, of all
 my father's works, does  not end  here. It  ends, in  fact, in  the most
 extraordinary way.                                                      
  This  text  C  was not  the last,  although the  published form  of the
 poem  was achieved  in it.  Another typescript  (D) was  made, doubtless
 at the same time as C, and given the title The Short Lay of Earendel; In
 this,  a  new  element  entered at  the beginning  of the  fourth stanza
 (There flying Elwing came  to him):  the attack  of the  four surviving
 sons of Feanor on the Havens  of Sirion,  Elwing's casting  herself into
 the sea, bearing the Silmaril, and her transformation into a seabird, in
 which guise she flew to meet Earendel returning (IV.152-3).             
                                                                        
       In wrath the Feanorians                                           
       that swore the unforgotten oath                                   
       brought war into Arvernien                                        
       with burning and with broken troth;                               
       and Elwing from her fastness dim                                  
       then cast her in the roaring seas,                                
       but like a bird was swiftly borne,                                
       uplifted o'er the roaring wave.                                   
       Through hopeless night she came to him                            
       and flame was in the darkness lit,                                
       more bright than light of diamond                                 
       the fire upon her carcanet.                                       
       The Silmaril she bound on him (&c.)                              
                                                                        
  There then followed a fine manuscript (E), with elaborate initials to
 the stanzas, and this was entitled The Short Lay of Earendel:          

 
                                                                          
 Earendillinwe. In this text a rewriting  of lines  5 -  8, which  had been
 entered in the margin of D, appears:                                      
                                                                          
               Her woven sails were white as snow,                         
               as flying foam her banner flowed;                           
               her prow was fashioned like a swan                          
               that white upon the Falas goes.                             
                                                                          
 But my father abandoned E at the foot of the  first page,  the end  of the
 third  stanza,  and  the  reason  why  he  abandoned  it  was that  he had
 already  begun to  rewrite in  the margin  both the  lines just  given and
 also the second stanza (In  panoply of  ancient kings).  So he  began once
 again,  with  a  very  similar  and  equally  beautiful   manuscript  (F),
 bearing the  same title;  and this  was completed.  The revisions  made to
 D  and to  E (so  far as  that went)  were taken  up; and  this manuscript
 remained intact, without the smallest further change.                     
   It  was in  fact the  last, the  ultimate development  of the  poem. The
 history I have attempted to convey is schematically thus:                 
   A     -     B     -     C     (the     form     in      FR     achieved)
 - D - E- F (the ultimate form of the poem)                                
   I have studied all these texts at length and at different times,  and it
 had  always seemed  strange to  me that  the chain  of development  led at
 last  to  a  superb  manuscript  (F)  without  any  disfigurement  through
 later  changes,  but  which was  not the  form found  in FR.  The solution
 was  at  last  provided  by  the text  C at  Marquette, which  showed that
 there were two lines of development from B.                              
   What  actually  happened  one  can  only  surmise.  I  believe  the most
 likely explanation to be that the texts D, E, F were mislaid, and  that at
 the crucial time the version represented by C went  to the  publishers, as
 it should not have done. It looks also as if these lost texts did not turn
 up  again  until  many  years  had  passed,  by  which  time my  father no
 longer  remembered  the  history. In  what are  obviously very  late notes
 he went so far as to analyse their readings in  relation to  the published
 form, and was evidently as puzzled  as I  was: his  analysis at  that time
 contains  demonstrably  incorrect  conclusions  -  because he  assumed, as
 I did, that all these texts must have preceded the 'final form' in FR.
   I give finally the Earendillinwe' in the form in  which it  should have
 been published.(26)                                                       
                                                                          
 Stanza 1   Earendil was a mariner                                           
            that tarried in Arvernien:                                     
            he built a boat of timber felled                               
            in Nimbrethil to journey in.                                   
            Her sails he wove of silver fair,                              
            with silver were her banners sewn;                             
            her prow he fashioned like the swans                           
            that white upon the Falas roam.                                

  Stanza 2. His coat that came from ancient kings                       
            of chained rings was forged of old;                         
            his shining shield all wounds defied,                        
            with runes entwined of dwarven gold.                        
            His bow was made of dragon-horn,                            
            his arrows shorn of ebony,                                  
            of triple steel his habergeon,                              
            his scabbard of chalcedony;                                 
            his sword was like a flame in sheath,                        
            with gems was wreathed his helmet tall,                     
            an eagle-plume upon his crest,                              
            upon his breast an emerald.                                 
                                                                       
  Stanza 3. As in FR, but with winds of fear for winds of wrath in line
                                                                       
            13 of the stanza.                                           
                                                                       
  Stanza 4. In might the Feanorians                                     
            that swore the unforgotten oath                             
            brought war into Arvernien                                  
            with burning and with broken troth;                         
            and Elwing from her fastness dim                            
            then cast her in the waters wide,                           
            but like a mew was swiftly borne,                           
            uplifted o'er the roaring tide.                             
            Through hopeless night she came to him,                     
            and flame was in the darkness lit,                           
            more bright than light of diamond                           
            the fire upon her carcanet.                                 
            The Silmaril she bound on him,                              
            and crowned him with the living light,                      
            and dauntless then with burning brow                        
            he turned his prow at middle-night.                         
            Beyond the world, beyond the Sea,                           
            then strong and free a storm arose,                          
            a wind of power in Tarmenel;                                
            by paths that seldom mortal goes                            
            from Middle-earth on mighty breath                          
            as flying wraith across the grey                            
            and long-forsaken seas distressed                           
            from East to West he passed away.                           
  Stanza 5  As in FR.                                                   
  Stanza 6  As in FR, but with a difference in the twelfth line:(27)    
            for ever king on mountain sheer;                            
                                                                       
  Stanza 7  A ship then new they built for him                          
            of mithril and of elvenglass                                

                     
                                                                       
         with crystal keel; no shaven oar                               
         nor sail she bore, on silver mast                              
         the Silmaril as lantern light                                  
         and banner bright with living flame                            
         of fire unstained by Elbereth                                  
         herself was set, who thither came (&c. as in FR)              
                                                                       
 Stanza 8. As in FR.                                                     
                                                                       
 Stanza 9. As in FR except at the end:                                   
                                                                       
         till end of Days on errand high,                               
         a herald bright that never rests,                              
         to bear his burning lamp afar,                                 
         the Flammifer of Westernesse.                                  
                                                                       
  Only one line survived now from Errantry (as published in 1933):       
 his scabbard of chalcedony.                                            
                                                                       
                                  NOTES.                                
                                                                       
 1. This  suggests that  the story  of Gandalf's  captivity found  in the
  'New   Plot'   of   August   1940  was   present  (p.   71):  'Saramund
  betrays  him  ...  he  tells Gandalf  false news  of the  Black Riders,
  and  they  pursue  him to  the top  of a  mountain...' The  final story
  of  what  had  happened to  Gandalf (set  to stand  on the  pinnacle of
  Orthanc) first appears in this period of the work (pp. 131 ff.).      
 2. Changed in pencil later to Elfstone son  of Elfhelm;  see p.  80 note
  17.  At  one  occurrence  of  Trotter  in  this passage,  where Gandalf
  names  him,  this  too  was  changed  to  Elfstone;  at  the  other two
  Trotter was retained, since it is Frodo who is speaking.              
 3. In a preliminary draft for this passage Frodo  says 'in  wonder': 'Is
  he of that race ?' Then follows:                                      
        'Didn't he tell  you, and  didn't you  guess?' said  Gandalf. 'He
  could  have  told  you  even  more:  he  is  Aragorn  son  of Kelegorn,
  descended   through   many   fathers   from   Isildur   the    son   of
  Elendil.'                                                             
        'Then  It  belongs  to  him  as  much  as  to  me or  more!' said
  Frodo.                                                                
        'It does not belong to either  of you,'  said Gandalf;  'but you,
  my  good  hobbit,  are  to  keep  it  for  a  while.   For  so   it  is
  ordained.'                                                            
     This was the second time that this dialogue had been used;  it first
  occurred   at   Bree   between   Trotter  and   Frodo  (p.   50),  when
  Gandalf  named  Aragorn  as  a  descendant  of  Elendil in  his letter,
  but this had now  been removed  (p. 77).  It was  finally used  in 'The
  Council of Elrond'.                                                   

                                               
                                                                           
  4. See p.  43 and  note 3.  The words  'I stayed  at The  Pony in  Bree for
     a bit' were  crossed out  before the  rest of  the passage  was changed,
     perhaps at the time of writing.                                        
  5. On Tarkil see p. 8. Westernesse: Numenor.                              
  6. In  the  version of  Errantry published  in 1962  the last  stanza began
     not  as  in  the  1933  Oxford Magazine  version but  at He  tarried for
     a little while (p. 88).                                                
  7. One  of  the  early  texts  has  the   head-note:  Elaboration   of  the
     well-known  pastime  of  the  never-ending  Tale';   and  at   the  end,
     after  the last  line a  weather-driven mariner,  returns to  He called
     the winds of argosies in the second verse  (p. 87),  with the  note: da
     capo, ad lib, et ad naus.                                              
  8. I cannot explain this reference.                                       
  9. See  Humphrey  Carpenter,  The  Inklings,  pp.  56  -  7;  also  Letters
     no.  133  (to  Rayner  Unwin,  22  June  1952)  and  no.  298 (to  W. L.
     White, 11 September 1967).                                             
 10. morion:    helmet.     bravery:    splendour,     finery.    dumbledore:
     bumble-bee.   panoply:   suit   of   armour.   attercop:   spider   (Old
     English  attor  'poison';  cf.  cobweb,  'cop-web').  Bilbo  called the
     spiders in Mirkwood Attercop.                                          
       On  the  back  of  the  page,  with  every  appearance of  having been
     written  at  the  same  time,  is a  section of  a dramatic  dialogue in
     rhyming   verse   that   preceded   by  more   than  twenty   years  the
     publication    of    The    Homecoming   of    Beorhtnoth   Beorhthelm's
     Son  in  Essays  and  Studies,  1953.  The   Englishmen  who   took  the
     body  of  Beorhtnoth  from  the  battlefield at  Maldon are  here called
     Pudda and Tibba. - Panta (Old English) is the river Blackwater.        
                                                                           
     Pudda Come, hurry. There may be more. Let's get away                   
             Or have the pirate pack on us.                                 
     Tibba                            Nay, nay.                            
             These are no Northmen. What should such come for?              
             They are all in Ipswich drinking to Thor.                      
             These have got what they deserved, not what they               
             sought.                                                        
     Pudda   God help us, when Englishmen can be brought                       
             By any need to prowl like carrion-bird                         
             And plunder their own.                                         
     Tibba                         There goes a third                       
             In the shadows yonder. He will not wait,                       
             That sort fight no odds, early or late,                        
             But sneak in when all's over. Up again!                        
             Steady once more.                                              
                                                                           
     Pudda          Say, Tibba, where's the wain?                           
                                                                           
             I wish we were at it! By the bridge you say -                  
             Well, we're nearer the bank. 'Tis more this way,               
             If we're not to walk in Panta, and the tide's in.              

                
                                                                        
      Tibba. Right! here we are.                                          
      Pudda. How did they win                                             
              Over the bridge, think you? There's little sign            
              Here of bitter fight. And yet here the brine               
                                                                        
              Should have been choked with 'em, but on the planks        
              There's only one lying.                                    
                                                                        
      Tibba.                       Well, God have thanks.                
                                                                        
              We're over! Gently! Up now, up! That's right.              
              Get up beside. There's a cloth; none too white,            
              But cover him over, and think of a prayer. I'll drive.     
      Pudda. Heaven grant us good journey, and that we arrive!            
              Where do we take him? How these wheels creak!              
      Tibba. To Ely! Where else?                                          
      Pudda. A long road!                                                  
      Tibba.                                For the weak.                
              A short road for the dead - and you can sleep.             
                                                                        
      This text is extremely rough, one would say in the first stage of
      composition, were there not another text still rougher, but in very
      much the same words (though with no ascription of the speeches     
      to speakers), in the Bodleian Library, where it is preserved (I
      believe) with my father's pictures. This begins at In the shadows
      yonder and continues a few lines further. On it my father wrote:
      'early version in rhyme of Beorhtnoth'.                            
  11. sigaldry: sorcery (see note 14). glamoury: magic.                 
  12. Preliminary lines of a new ending were written on the manuscript
      of the first version:                                              
      So now he must depart again                                        
      and start again his gondola,                                       
      a silly merry passenger,                                           
      a messenger, an errander,                                          
      a jolly, merry featherbrain,                                       
      a weathervane, a mariner.                                          
      Other differences in the second version from that published in     
      1933 were:                                                         
                                                                        
                     he wrought her raiment marvellous                   
                     and garments all a-glimmering                       
                                                                        
      in the fifth verse; and 'He made a sword and  morion' in  the eighth
      (with spear for sword in the third line).                         
  13. Maurice  Bowra,  at   that  time   Vice-Chancellor  of   Oxford  Uni-
      versity.                                                           
  14. In  the  letter to  Donald Swann  cited on  p. 85  my father  gave an
      example  of  this  (Swann  had  himself known  the poem  by 'indepen-
      dent  tradition'  for  many  years  before  its  publication  in  The
      Adventures   of   Tom   Bombadil):   'A   curious  feature   was  the
      preservation  of  the  word  sigaldry,  which  I  got  from   a  13th
      century  text  (and  is  last  recorded  in the  Chester Play  of the

       Crucifixion).' The word goes back to the second version of            
       Errantry; it was used also in the Lay of Leithian line 2072,          
       written in 1928 (The Lays of Beleriand, p. 228).                      
  15.  cardamon is so spelt, but cardamom in preliminary rough               
       workings, as in the Oxford Magazine version of Errantry.              
  16.  I ignore all variants (though a few, as merry written above gallant
       in line 1, ladyfern above everfern in line 10) may belong to the      
       time of writing. A few inconsistencies of hyphenation are pre-        
       served. In the latter part of the poem the stanza-divisions are not
       perfectly clear. Line-numbers at intervals of 8 are marked on the     
       original.                                                             
  17.  This verse is absent from the first text, but a space was left for it,
       with the note: 'They enchant his boat and give it wings'.             
  18.  A four-line stanza follows here:                                      
       She caught him in her stranglehold                                    
       entangled all in ebon thread,                                         
       and seven times with sting she smote                                  
       his ringed coat with venom dread.                                     
       But this was struck out, apparently at once, since the line-          
       numbering does not take account of it. - ebon: old form for           
       ebony; here meaning 'black, dark'.                                    
  19.  In the second version (that printed here) merry was written as a      
       variant to gallant; in the third gallant is a variant to merry.       
  20.  The encounter of the Messenger with the Attercops in Errantry         
       was a point of contact with the Earendel legend.                      
  21.  The texts are found in II.252 - 77; IV.37 - 8, 41, 148 - 54;          
       V.324 - 9.                                                            
  22.  The manuscript was perhaps a development from the third               
       version parallel to the first typescript, for it takes up certain     
       variants from the former (as everfern in line 10, Gloaming-bree       
       (bree 'hill') in line 17), where the first typescript takes up others
       (lady fern, Gloaming-fields).                                         
  23.  An intermediate version of these lines was:                           
       He heard there moan in stony caves                                    
       the lonely waves of Orfalas;                                          
       the winds he heard of Tarmenel:                                       
       by paths that seldom mortals pass                                     
       they wafted him on flying wings                                       
       a dying thing across the grey                                         
       and long-forsaken seas distressed;                                    
       from East to West he passed away.                                     
  24.  This is the typescript of 'Many Meetings' that followed the           
       version described at the beginning of this chapter.                   
  25.  These were made on B also, and so appear in the other line of         
       development as well.                                                  
  26.  It could be argued of course that my father actually rejected all     

       
                                                                           
 the  subsequent  development  after  the  text   C,  deciding   that  that
 was  the  version  desirable  at  all points;  but this  would seem  to me
 to be wholly improbable and far-fetched.                                   
27. This case is slightly different, in that it is the only point where text
 C  does  not  reach  the  form  in  FR  (in  Ilmarin  on  mountain  sheer),
 but  has  the  line  found  also  in  D  (followed  by E  and F),  for ever
 king  on  mountain  sheer.  This   must  have   been  a   final  emendation
 in  the  'first  line'  of  development,  and  might  of  course  have been
 made to the 'second line' as well if that had been available.              

                                      VI.                                   
                          THE COUNCIL OF ELROND (1).                        
                                                                           
                              The Second Version.                           
                                                                           
 A  new version  of this  part of  the narrative (1) is a  characteristic 'fair
 copy': too close to the  preceding text  (VI.399 ff.)  to justify  the space
 needed to set it  out, but  constantly differing  in the  expression chosen.
 The chapter is numbered XIV (see p. 81), but has no title.                 
  The  story  was  still  that  Bilbo  and  Gandalf came  to Frodo's  room in
 the  morning  (VI.395);  and those  present at  the Council  were in  no way
 changed  (VI.400).  Boromir  still  comes  from  'the  Land  of Ond,  far in
 the  South'.(2) The  first  important  change  comes  after  Gandalf's speech,
 in  which he  'made clear  to those  who did  not already  know it  the tale
 of the  Ring, and  the reasons  why the  Dark Lord  so greatly  desired it.'
 Here, in the original version, Bilbo's story followed; but in this  text the
 following passage enters:                                                  
                                                                           
  When he told of Elendil and  Gilgalad and  of their  march into           
 the East, Elrond sighed. 'I remember well their array,' he said.           
 'It reminded me of the Great Wars and victories of Beleriand, so           
 many fair captains and princes were there, and  yet not  so many           
 or so fair as when Thangorodrim was broken [> taken].'                     
  'You remember?' said Frodo, breaking  silence in  his astonish-           
 ment, and gazing in wonder at Elrond. 'But I thought the fall of           
 Gilgalad was many ages ago.'                                               
  'So it was,'  said Elrond,  looking gravely  at Frodo;  'but my           
 memory  reaches  back  many  ages.  I   was  the   minstrel  and           
 counsellor of  Gilgalad. My  father was  Earendel, who  was born           
 in  Gondolin,  seven  years  before  it  fell;  and   my  mother           
 was  Elwing,  daughter of  [Dior, son  of] Luthien,  daughter of           
 Thingol,  King  of Doriath;  and I  have seen  many ages  in the           
 West of  the World.  I knew  Beleriand before  it was  broken in           
 the great wars.'                                                           
                                                                           
  This is the origin of the passage in FR  p. 256;  but it  goes back  to and
 follows quite  closely part  of an  earlier and  isolated writing,  given in
 VI.215  -  16,(3) in  which the  story of  Gil-galad and  Elendil was  told at
 much  greater  length  by  Elrond  to  Bingo,   apparently  in   a  personal

 conversation between them; and that text was  in turn  closely related
 to  the  conclusion  of  the second  version of  The Fall  of Numenor
 (V.28 - 9).                                                           
   The new text continues:                                             
                                                                      
   They  passed  then  from  the  winning  and  losing  of the  Ring to
 Bilbo's  story;  and once  more he  told how  he had  found it  in the
 cave  of  the  Misty  Mountains.  Then  Aragorn  took  up   the  tale,
 and  spoke  of  the   hunt  for   Gollum,  in   which  he   had  aided
 Gandalf,  and  of  his  [>  their]  perilous journey  through southern
 Mirkwood,   and   into   Fangorn   Forest,    and   over    the   Dead
 Marshes  to  the  very  borders  of the  land of  Mordor. In  this way
 the  history  was  brought  slowly  down  to  the   spring  morning...
 (&c. as VI.401).                                                     
                                                                      
   In the first version Trotter was still the hobbit Peregrin, with his
 wooden shoes (VI.401 and note 20).                                    
   Gandalf in his  reply to  Elrond's question  about Bombadil  'Do you
 know him, Gandalf?' now says:                                         
                                                                      
   'Yes. And  I went  to him  at once,  naturally, as  soon as  I found
 that  the  hobbits  had  gone  into  the  Old  Forest.  I dare  say he
 would  have  kept  them  longer  in his  house, if  he had  known that
 I was so near. But I am  not sure  - not  sure that  he did  not know,
 and  not  sure that  he would  have behaved  differently in  any case.
 He  is  a very  strange creature,  and follows  his own  counsels: and
 they are not easy to fathom.'                                         
                                                                      
   It seems that when my father wrote this he cannot  have had  in mind
 the  outline  dated  August 26-27  1940, in  which Gandalf  arrived at
 Crickhollow and found it deserted  (p. 72),  since Gandalf  could only
 have learnt from Hamilcar Bolger that the other hobbits had  gone into
 the Old Forest. On the other hand  my father  was still  uncertain (p.
 72), in that outline and with that plot,  whether Gandalf  had visited
 Bombadil  or  not.  At  any  rate,  by  what  looks  to  be  an almost
 immediate change, the wizard's remarks were rewritten:                
                                                                      
   'I  know  of  him,  though  we seldom  meet. I  am a  rolling stone,
 and  he  is  a gatherer  of moss.  Both have  a work  to do,  but they
 do  not  help  one another  often. It  might have  been wiser  to have
 sought his  aid, but  I do  not think  I should  have gained  much. He
 is a strange creature...'                                             
                                                                      
   It must have been at this point that my father finally  decided that
 there had been no visit  to Bombadil,  and the  story reverted  to its
 earlier form (see VI.413 note 23).                                    
   The  sentence in  Gandalf's reply  to Erestor  'I doubt  whether Tom

 Bombadil  alone,  even  on  his  own  ground,  could withstand  that Power'(4)
 (VI.402)  was  soon  rewritten  thus  (anticipating  in  part  both  Gandalf
 and  Glorfindel  in  FR  p.  279):  'Whether  Bombadil  alone,  even  on his
 own  ground,  could  withstand  that  Power  is   beyond  all   guessing.  I
 think not; and in the end, if all else is conquered, Tom will fall:  last as
 he  was  first,  and  the  Night  will  come. He  would likely  enough throw
 the Ring away, for such things have no part in his mind.'                  
   Gloin's  answer  to   Boromir's  question   concerning  the   Seven  Rings
 remains almost exactly as it was  (VI.403 -  4),(5) but  Elrond's reply  to the
 question  about  the  Three  Rings  has  certain  changes:  notably,  he now
 states  as  a  fact  known  to  him  what  Gandalf  (in  'Ancient  History',
 VI.320) had  asserted only  as his  belief: 'The  Three Rings  remain still.
 But  wisely  they  have  been  taken  over  the  Sea,  and  are  not  now in
 Middle-earth.' He continues:                                               
                                                                           
 From  them  the  Elvenkings  have  derived  much power,  but they          
 have not availed them in their strife with  Sauron. For  they can          
 give  no  skill  or  knowledge  that he  did not  himself already          
 possess at their making. To each race the rings of the Lord bring          
 such power as each desires and can best wield. The  Elves desired          
 not strength, or domination, or hoarded  wealth, but  subtlety of          
 craft and lore and knowledge of the secrets of the world's being.          
 These things they have gained, yet with sorrow. But all  in their          
 mind and heart which is derived from the rings will turn to their          
 undoing,  and  become  revealed  to  Sauron,  if  he  regains the          
 Ruling Ring, as was his purpose.'                                          
                                                                           
   The  omission  here  of  the  words in  the original  text 'For  they came
 from  Sauron  himself'  does  not,  I  think,  show  that the  conception of
 the  independence  of  the  Three  Rings  of  the  Elves  from   Sauron  had
 arisen,  in  view  of  the following  words which  were retained:  'For they
 can  give no  skill or  knowledge that  he did  not himself  already possess
 at  their  making';  moreover  Boromir  still  in  his  question  concerning
 them  says  that 'these  too were  made by  Sauron in  the elder  days', and
 he is not contradicted. See further pp. 155-6.                             
   The  next  text  then  follows  the  old  very closely  indeed (VI.404-7),
 until  the  point  where Gandalf,  in the  afternoon following  the Council,
 overtakes  Frodo,  Merry,  and  Faramond  (still  so  called,  with Peregrin
 written  in  later)  walking  in  the  woods;  and  here  the   new  version
 diverges  for  a  stretch, Gandalf's  remarks about  the composition  of the
 Company  being  quite  different  -  and  not  only  because Trotter  is now
 Aragorn:  a  doubt  here  appears  about  the inclusion  of the  two younger
 hobbits.                                                                   
                                                                           
 '...  So  be  careful! You  can't be  too careful.  As for  the rest  of the
 party,  it  is  too  soon  to  discuss  that.  But  whether  any  of  you go

 with   Frodo   or   not,   I   shall   make   other  arrangements   for  the
 supply of intelligence.'                                                    
    'Ah!   Now   we   know   who   really   is  important,'   laughed  Merry.
 'Gandalf  is  never  in  doubt  about   that,  and   does  not   let  anyone
 else   forget   it.   So   you   are   already   making   arrangements,  are
 you?'                                                                       
    'Of  course,'  said  Gandalf.  'There  is  a  lot  to  do  and  think of.
 But  in   this  matter   both  Elrond   and  Trotter   will  have   much  to
 say.   And   indeed   Boromir,   and   Gloin,   and   Glorfindel,   too.  It
 concerns all the free folk left in the world.'                              
    'Will   Trotter   come?'   asked   Frodo   hopefully.   'Though   he   is
 only a Man, he would add to the brains of the expedition.'                  
    '  "Only  a  Man"  is  no  way to  speak of  a tarkil,  and least  of all
 Aragorn   son  of   Celegorn,'  said   Gandalf.  'He   would  add   wit  and
 valour  to  any  expedition.  But  as  I  said,  this  is  not the  time and
 not  the  place  to discuss  it. Yet  I will  say just  this in  your ears.'
          . His voice sank to a whisper. 'I think I shall have to come with
 you.'                                                                       
                     So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that
          : Gandalf took off his hat and bowed. 'But I only said: I think I
              shall have to go, and perhaps for part of the way only. Don't
                count on anything,' he added. 'And now, if you want to talk
                      about such things, you had better come back indoors.'
                  They walked back with him in silence; but as soon as they
            were over the threshold Frodo put the question that had been in
            : his mind ever since the Council. 'How long shall I have here,
                                                        Gandalf?' he asked.
                'I don't know,' answered the wizard. 'But we shan't be able
               to make our plans and preparations very quickly. Scouts have
          : already been sent out, and some may be away a long while. It is
         - essential to find out as much as we can about the Black Riders.'
                                                                            
 The  new  version  then returns  to the  first and  follows it  very closely
 : to the end of that text ('... waiting for him to set out', VI.409). But it
 then  continues  into  'The  Ring  Goes  South'  (VI.415)  without  break or
 heading,  and  again  follows  the old  pretty closely  for some  distance -
 as  far  as  Gandalf's  words 'And  the hunters  will have  to come  all the
 Way back to the Ford to pick up the trail -  if we  are careful,  and lucky'
 (VI.416). There  are a  few differences  to be  noted. This  version begins:
 'When  the  hobbits  had  been  some  three  weeks in  the house  of Elrond,
 and November  was  passing'  (see  VI.415  and  note  2);  the   scouts  who
 had gone north  had been  'almost as  far as  Hoardale' (later  > 'as  far as
 the  Hoardales'),  where  in  the  original  text  they  had   reached  'the

                                            
                                                                                   
 Dimrill-dales' (see p. 10 and note 14); and it is said of the  High Pass:          
 'where formerly the Goblins' door  had been'.  Very faint  pencillings at          
 the foot of the page give  Elvish names  of the  places mentioned  in the          
 text, just as are found in the preceding version (see VI.432 note 4), but          
 these are not the same. The note reads:                                            
                                                                                   
 In Elvish Annerchion = Goblin Gate.                    Ruinnel = Redway.           
       Nenvithim = Hoardales                            Palath-ledin = Gladden.     
                                                                                   
                                                          Field [s]                 
                                                        Palath = Iris.              
                                                                                   
  But where in the first version Gandalf says: 'We had better get off as          
 soon as possible now - and as quietly', and the story then passes                  
 almost at once to the day of departure, this text diverges to the first full       
 and clear account of the selection of the Company of the Ring - who                
 are still to be seven (see VI.409 - 10); and the selection now takes place         
 at the same point in the narrative as it does in FR (pp. 288-9).                   
                                                                                   
 '... It is time we began to make preparations in earnest, and the                  
 first thing to do is to decide who is going. I have my own ideas,                
 but I must consult Elrond.'                                                        
  Both Elrond and the wizard were agreed that the party must                        
 not be too large, for their hope lay in speed and secrecy. 'Seven                
 and no more should there be,' said Elrond. 'If Frodo is still                      
 willing, then Frodo as ring-bearer must be the first choice. And                    
 if Frodo goes, then Sam Gamgee must go too, because that was                      
 promised, and my heart tells me that their fates are woven                         
 together.'                                                                         
  'And if two hobbits go, then I must go,' said Gandalf, 'for my                   
 wits tell me that I shall be needed; and indeed my fate seems.                     
 much entangled with hobbits.'                                                      
  'That is three then,' said Elrond. 'If there are others, they                     
 should represent the other free folk of the world.'                                
  'I will go on behalf of Men,' said Trotter. 'I claim some right                   
 to share in the adventures of the Ring; but I wish also to go out                 
 of friendship for Frodo, and therefore I will ask his leave to be                  
 his companion.'                                                                    
  'I could choose no one more gladly,' said Frodo. 'I had                           
 thought of begging what is freely offered.' He took Trotter's                     
 hand.                                                                              
  'Boromir will also come,' said Gandalf. 'He is resolved to                      
 return as soon as he can to his own land, to the siege and war (6)                 
 that he has told of. His way goes with ours. He is a valiant man.'                 
  'For the Elves I will choose Galdor of Mirkwood,' said                            
 Elrond, 'and for the Dwarves Gimli son of Gloin. If they are                       

 
                                                                        
 willing  to go  with you,  even as  far as  Moria, they  will be  a help
 to you. That is seven and the full tale.'                               
  'What    about    Meriadoc   and    Faramond   [>    Peregrin]?'   said
 Frodo,  suddenly  realizing   that  his   friends  were   not  included.
 'Merry  has  come  far  with  me,  and  it  will grieve  him to  be left
 behind now.'                                                          
  'Faramond   [>  Peregrin]   would  go   with  you   out  of   love  for
 you,  if  he  were  bidden,'  said  Gandalf;  'but his  heart is  not in
 such  perilous  adventures,  much  though  he  loves  you.   Merry  will
 be grieved, it is true, but Elrond's decision  is wise.  He is  merry in
 name,  and  merry  in  heart, but  this quest  is not  for him,  nor for
 any  hobbit,  unless  fate  and  duty  chooses  him.   But  do   not  be
 distressed:  I  think  there  may  be  other  work  for  him to  do, and
 that he will not be left long idle.'                                    
  When   the   names   and   number   of   the   adventurers   had   thus
 been  decided,  it  was  agreed  that  the  day  of departure  should be
 the   following   Thursday,   November   the   seventeenth.   The   next
 few  days  were  busy  with  preparations,  but  Frodo  spent   as  much
 time  as  he  could  alone  with  Bilbo.  The  weather  had  grown cold,
 and  was  now  cheerless  and  grey,  and  they  sat  often  together in
 Bilbo's  own   small  room.   Then  Bilbo   would  read   passages  from
 his  book  (which  seemed  still  very  incomplete),  or  scraps  of his
 verses, and take notes of Frodo's adventures.                           
  On  the  morning  of  the  last  day,  Bilbo  pulled  out   from  under
 his  bed  a  wooden  box,  and  lifted  the  lid,  and  fumbled  inside.
 'You  have  got  a  good  sword  of  your  own,  I  believe,'   he  said
 hesitatingly  to  Frodo;  'but  I  thought,  perhaps,  you   would  care
 to have this as well, or instead, don't you know.'                      
                                                                        
  From this point the new  text reaches  virtually the  final form  in FR
 pp. 290-1,(7) as far as 'I should like to write the second book, if  I am
 spared.' This was evidently where the chapter ended at this stage.      
  For  a  brief  while my  father evidently  suspected that  Meriadoc and
 Faramond/Peregrin  would  be  superfluous  in  what  he conceived  to be
 the last stage of the Quest. - It is curious that Elrond, when declaring
 his choice of Galdor of  Mirkwood and  Gimli son  of Gloin,  here refers
 to Moria as if the  passage of  the Mines  were already  determined; but
 this cannot have been intentional.                                      
                                                                        
  Later  pencilled  changes  made  to  the  name  Ond in  this manuscript
 may  be mentioned  here. At  the first  occurrence the  Land of  Ond was
 struck  out,  and  in  the  margin my  father wrote  Minas-tir Minas-ond
 Minas-berel, finally putting the City of Minas-tirith.  This may  be the
 place  where  Minas  Tirith  (which  already   existed  in   the  Quenta

                                
                                                                        
 Silmarillion,  V.264,  269)  first  emerged  in  this application.  At a
 subsequent  occurrence  Ond  was  changed  to  Minas-berel  and  then to
 Minas Tirith.                                                           
                                                                        
  A very rough pencilled outline, written on the 'August 1940'           
 examination script described on p. 67, brings in entirely new aspects
 of the discussion at the Council. At the head of the page stand these:
 names:                                                                  
  Minas Giliath Minas rhain (8) Othrain = .... city (9) Minas tirith             
 Then follows:                                                           
                                                                        
  At Council.                                                            
  Aragorn's ancestry.                                                    
  Gloin's quest- to ask after Bilbo.? News of Balin.??                  
  Boromir. Prophecies had been spoken. The Broken Sword should           
  be reforged. Our wise men said the Broken Sword was in Rivendell.      
  I have the Broken Sword, said Tarkil. My fathers were driven out       
  of your city when Sauron raised a rebellion, and he that is now the
  Chief of the Nine drove us out.                                        
  Minas Morgol.                                                          
  War between Ond and Wizard King.                                       
  %ere Tarkil's sires had been King. Tarkil will come and help           
  Ond. Tarkil's fathers had been driven out by the wizard that is now
  Chief of the Nine.                                                     
  Gandalf's story of Saruman and the eagle. Elrond explains that         
  Eagles had been sent to look. This only if Gandalf goes straight to
  Rivendell. Otherwise how could the eagles find Gandalf?                
                                                                        
 The Broken  Sword appears  in the  last revisions  to the  Prancing Pony
 story (written on the same paper as this  outline), where  Trotter draws
 it out in the inn (p. 78).(10) - The meaning  of the  last two  sentences of
 the  outline  is  presumably  that  Gandalf  went straight  to Rivendell
 when he left Hobbiton in June, and  there told  Elrond that  he intended
 to  visit  Saruman.  Compare  the  notes  given  on  p. 75:  'Gandalf is
 captured by Saruman. Elves send  word that  he is  missing... Glorfindel
 is sent out, and messengers  sent to  Eagles.... They  fly all  over the
 lands, and find Gandalf...'                                             
                                                                        
                            The Third Version.                           
                                                                        
 More is told of this story of 'Tarkil's sires' and Ond in a manuscript
 written on the same paper, which I give next, and which despite its     
 being so rough and incomplete I will call 'the Third Version'. This text
 develops Gloin's story, and is followed by the account given by Galdor .
 of Mirkwood of Gollum's escape, which here first enters.(11) In these     

  parts of the  text there  is a  great advance  towards FR  (pp. 253  - 5,
  268  -  9),  where  however  the  ordering  of the  speeches made  at the
  Council is quite different.  Finally we  reach the  story of  the Numeno-
  rean  kingdoms  in Middle-earth,  still in  an extremely  primitive form,
  and written in a fearsome  scrawl; most  unhappily a  portion of  this is
  lost.                                                                    
    There are a  fair number  of alterations  in pencil,  but I  think that
  these  belong to  much the  same time  as the  writing of  the manuscript
  (which ends in pencil). I take these up silently where they are of slight
  significance, but in many cases I show them as such in the text.         
                                                                          
    Much  was  said  of  events  in  the   world  outside,   especially  in
  the  South,  and  in  the  wide  lands  east of  the Mountains.  Of these
  things  Frodo  had  already  heard  many  rumours.   But  the   tales  of
  Gloin   and   of   Boromir   were   new   to   him,   and   he   listened
  attentively.  It  appeared  that  the  hearts  of  the  Dwarves   of  the
  Mountain were troubled.                                                  
    'It  is  now  many  years  ago,'   said  Gloin,   'that  a   shadow  of
  disquiet  fell  upon  our  folk.  Whence  it  came  we  did not  at first
  know.  Whispered  words  began  to  be  spoken:  it  was  said   that  we
  were   hemmed  in   a  narrow   place,  and   that  greater   wealth  and
  splendour  were  to  be  found  in  the  wider   world.  Some   spoke  of
  Moria  -  the  mighty  works  of  our  fathers  of  old,  that  we called
  in  our  ancient  tongue  Khazaddum  -   and  they   said  that   we  now
  had  the  power  and  numbers  to  return  and  there   re-establish  our
  halls  in  glory  and  command  the  lands  both  West  and  East  of the
  Mountains.  At  the  last,  some  score  of  years  ago,  Balin departed,
  though  Dain  did  not  give  leave  willingly,  and  he  took  with  him
  Oin  and  Ori  and  many  of  our  folk,  and   they  went   away  south.
  For   a   while   we   heard   news,   and   it  seemed   good:  messages
  reported  that  Moria  had   been  re-entered,   and  great   work  begun
  there.  Then  all  fell  silent.  There  was  peace  under  the  Mountain
  again for a space, until rumour of the rings began to be heard.          
    'Messages   came  a   year  ago   from  Mordor   far  away;   and  they
  offered  us  rings  of   power  such   as  the   lord  of   Mordor  could
  make  -  on  condition  of  our  friendship  and  aid.  And   they  asked
  urgently   concerning   one    Bilbo,   whom    it   seemed    they   had
  learned   was   once   our   friend.   They   commanded   us   to  obtain
  from  him  if  we could,  willing or  unwilling, a  certain ring  that he
  had  possessed.  In  exchange  for  this  we  were  offered   three  such
  rings  as  our  fathers  had  of  old. Even  for news  of where  he might
  be found we were promised lasting friendship and great reward.           
    'We   knew   well   that   the   friendship   of   such   messages  was

 feigned  and  concealed  a threat,  for by  that time  many rumours
 of  evil  also  reached  us  concerning  Mordor.  We  have returned
 yet  no answer;  and I  have come  first from  Dain, to  warn Bilbo
 that he is sought by the Dark Lord, and  to learn  (if may  be) why
 this is so. Also we  crave the  counsel of  Elrond, for  the shadow
 grows.  We  perceive  that  messages  have also  been sent  to King
 Brand in Dale, and that he is  afraid to  resist. Already  there is
 war  gathering  on  his  southern  borders.  If  we make  no answer
 the Dark Lord will move other men to assail him and us.'          
   'You  have  done  well  to  come,'  said  Elrond. 'You  will hear
 today all that is necessary  for the  understanding of  the Enemy's
 purposes,  and  why  he  seeks Bilbo.  There is  nought you  can do
 other than to resist, whether with hope or without  it. But  as you
 will hear, your trouble is  only part  of ours  [> the  troubles of
 others]; and your hope will rise and fall with the fortunes  of the
 Ring.  Let  us  now  hear  the  words  of  Galdor of  Mirkwood, for
 they are yet known to few.'                                       
   Galdor  spoke.  'I  do not  come,' he  said, 'to  add to  all the
 accounts  of  gathering  war  and  unrest,  though Mirkwood  is not
 spared,  and the  dark things  that fled  from it  for a  while are
 returning in such number that my people are hard put  to it.  But I
 am sent to bear tidings: they are not  good, I  fear; but  how ill,
 others  must  judge.  Smeagol  that  is   now  called   Gollum  has
 escaped.'                                                         
   'What!' cried Trotter in surprise. 'I judge that to be  ill news,
 and  you  may  mark  my  words:  we  shall  regret  this.  How came
 the Wood-elves to fail in their trust?'                           
   'Not  through  lack  of  vigilance,'  said  Galdor;  'but perhaps
 through  overmuch   kindness,  and   certainly  through   aid  from
 elsewhither.  He  was  guarded day  and night;  but hoping  for his
 cure we had  not the  heart to  keep him  ever in  dungeons beneath
 the ground.'                                                      
   'You were less  tender to  me,' said  Gloin with  a flash  of his
 eye,  as  ancient  memories  of  his  prison  in  the halls  of the
 Elven-king were aroused.                                          
   'Now,  now!'  said   Gandalf.  'Don't   interrupt!  That   was  a
 regrettable misunderstanding.'                                    
   'In  days  of  fair  weather  we  led  him  through  the  woods,'
 Galdor went  on; 'and  there was  a high  tree, standing  alone far
 from others, which he liked  to climb.  Often we  let him  climb in
 it till he felt the free wind; but we set a guard at the  foot. One
 day  he  would  not  descend,  and  the  guards  having no  mind to

 climb after him (he could  cling to  branches with  his feet  as well
 as with his hands) sat by the tree into the twilight. It was  on that
 very  evening  in  summer  under  a  clear  moon  that the  Orcs came
 down  upon  us.  We  drove  them  off  after  some  time;   but  when
 the  battle  was  over,  we  found  Gollum was  gone, and  the guards
 had  vanished  also.  It  seems  clear that  the attack  was arranged
 for the rescue  of Gollum,  and that  he knew  of it  beforehand; but
 in  what  way  we  cannot  guess.  We  failed  to  recapture  him. We
 came on his trail  and that  of some  Orcs, and  it seemed  to plunge
 deep  into  Mirkwood  going  south   and  west;   but  ere   long  it
 escaped  even  our  skill,  nor  dare  we continue  the hunt,  for we
 were  drawing  near  the  Mountains  of  Mirkwood  in  the  midst  of
 the forest, and they are become evil, and we do not go that way.*
   'Well,  well!'  said  Gandalf.  'He has  got away,  and we  have no
 time  or  chance  now  to  go  after him  again. Evidently  the Enemy
 wants  him.  What  for,  we  may  discover  in good  time, or  in bad
 time.(12) I still had some hopes of  curing him,.  but evidently  he did
 not wish to be cured.'                                              
   'But  now our  tale goes  far away  and long  ago,' said  Elrond [>
 Gandalf]. [Direction  here  for insertion  of a  rider which  is not
 extant; but see p. 126.] 'In the  days that  followed the  Elder Days
 after  the  fall  of  Numenor  the  men  of  Westernesse came  to the
 shores  of  the  Great  Lands, as  is recorded  still in  history and
 legend [> in lore]. Of  their kings  Elendil was  the chief,  and his
 ships sailed up the  great river  which flows  out of  Wilderland [in
 margin,  struck out  in pencil:  This river  they name  Sirvinya, New
 Sirion.]  and  finds  the  Western  Sea  in  the  Bay   of  [Ramathor
 Ramathir  >]  Belfalas.  In  the  land  about  they  made a  realm [>
 In  the  land about  its lower  course he  established a  realm]; and
 the  [>  his) chief  city was  Osgiliath the  Fort of  Stars, through
 which  the  river  flowed.  But  other  strong  places were  set upon
 hills upon either  side: Minas  Ithil the  Tower of  the Moon  in the
 West,  and  Minas  Anor  the  Tower  of  the  Sun  in  the   East  [>
 Minas  Ithil  the  Tower  of  the  Rising  Moon  in  the   East,  and
 Minas Anor the Tower of the Setting Sun in the West].               
   'And  these  cities  were   governed  by   the  sons   of  Elendil:
 llmandur  [struck  out  in  pencil],  Isildur,  and Anarion.  But the
 sons  of  Elendil  did  not  return  from  the  war with  Sauron, and
 only  in  Minas  Ithil  [>  Anor]  was  the  lordship  of   the  West
 maintained.  There  ruled  the  son  of Isildur  [> Anarion]  and his
 sons   after   him.   But   as   the   world  worsened   and  decayed
 Osgiliath  fell  into  ruin, and  the servants  of Sauron  took Minas

 Anor [not changed to Ithil], and it became a place of dread, and            
 was called Minas Morgol, the                                                
                                                                            
   The  whole  of  the  last  paragraph  was  struck  through in  pencil. The
 last words stand at the  foot of  a page,  and the  following page  is lost.
 This is a misfortune, since a part of the  earliest form  of the  history is
 lost  with  it.  The  text  when it  takes up  again is  complex, and  it is
 clearest to number  it in  sections from  (i) to  (iii). We  are now  in the
 middle of a speech by Boromir.                                              
                                                                            
                                     (i)                                     
                                                                            
 '...   But  of   these  words   none  of   us  could   understand  anything,
 until   we   learnt   after  seeking   far  and   wide  that   Imlad-ril  (>
 Imlad-rist]  was  the  name  of  a   far  northern   dale,  called   by  men
 [>   men   in   the   North]   Rivendell,   where   Elrond   the  Half-elven
 dwelt.'                                                                     
   'But  the  rest  shall  now  be   made  clear   to  you,'   said  Trotter,
 standing  up.  He  drew  forth  his  sword,  and  cast   it  upon   a  table
 before   Boromir:   in   two   pieces.   'Here   is   the  Sword   that  was
 Broken, and I am the bearer.'                                               
   'But  who  are  you,  and  what  have  you   or  it   to  do   with  Minas
 Tirith?' asked Boromir.                                                     
   'He   is   Aragorn   son   of   Celegorn,   descended   in    right   line
 [added:   through   many  fathers]   from  Isildur   of  Minas   Ithil,  son
 of  Elendil,'  said  Elrond.  'He  is  tarkil and  one of  the few  now left
 of that people.'                                                            
                                                                            
   (At this point  there is  a mark  of insertion  for another  passage, here
 identified as  (iii), which  is to  replace what  now follows,  the continua-
 tion of passage (i).)                                                       
                                                                            
                                     (ii)                                    
                                                                            
   'And the Men of Minas Tirith drove out my fathers,' said                 
 Aragorn. 'Is not that remembered, Boromir? The men of that                  
 town have never ceased to wage war on Sauron, but they have                 
 listened not seldom to counsels that came from him. In the days             
 of Valandur they murmured against the Men of the West, and                  
 rose against them, and when they came back from battle with                 
 Sauron they refused them entry into the city.(13) Then Valandur                 
 broke his sword before the city gates and went away north; and              
 for long the heirs of Elendil dwelt at Osforod the Northburg in             
 slowly waning glory and darkening days. But all the Northland               

 has  now  long  been  waste;  and  all  that are  left of  Elendil's folk
 few.                                                                     
   'What  do  the  men  of  Minas  Tirith  want  with   me  -   to  return
 to aid [them] in the war and then reject me at the gates again?'         
                                                                         
   This passage (ii) was struck through in pencil.  Hurled onto  the page,
 this narrative is  only one  stage advanced  from the  highly provisional
 outlines  which  my   father  made   at  various   points  as   the  work
 proceeded. I think that this obscure story,  with its  notable suggestion
 of  a subject  population that  was not  Numenorean (although  the cities
 were founded  by Elendil),  was rejected  almost as  soon as  written; it
 may be that it was the  earliest form  of the  history of  the Numenorean
 realms in exile that my father conceived.                                
   The passage to replace (ii) was scribbled very  rapidly and  in pencil;
 it was not struck out.                                                   
                                                                         
                                   (iii)                                  
                                                                         
   'Then  it  belongs  to  you  as  much  as  me,  or more!'  cried Frodo,
 looking at Trotter in amazement.                                         
   'It  does  not  belong  to  either  of  us,' said  Trotter, 'but  it is
 ordained  that  you  should  keep it  for a  while.(14) Yes, I am the heir
 of  Elendil,'  said  he,  turning  again to  Boromir; [all  the following
 struck  out  at  the  time of  writing: 'for  I have  heard it  said that
 long  ago  you  drove  out  the  Men  of  the   West  from   Minas  Anor.
 You  have  ever  fought  against   Sauron,  but   not  seldom   you  have
 hearkened  to  counsels  that  came  from  him.  Do   you  wish   that  I
 should   return   to   Minas   Morgol   or    to   Minas    Tirith?   For
 Valandil  son  of  Elendil  was  taken  [?  as  child]  For  the  Men  of
 Minas  Ithil]   'For  Valandil   son  of   Isildur  remained   among  the
 Elves,  and  was  saved,  and  he  went   at  last   with  such   of  his
 father's  men  as  remained,  and   dwelt  in   the  North   in  Osforod,
 the  Northburg,  which  is  now  waste,  so  that  its  very  foundations
 can  scarce  be  seen  beneath  the   turf.  And   our  days   have  ever
 waned   and   darkened   through   the   years.   But   ever    we   have
 wandered   far  and   wide,  yes,   even  to   the  borders   of  Mordor,
 making   secret   war   upon  the   Enemy.  But   the  sword   has  never
 been  reforged.  For  it  was  Elendil's  and  broke  under  him   as  he
 fell,  and  was  brought  away   by  his   esquire  and   treasured.  And
 Elendil   said:   "This  sword   shall  not   be  brandished   again  for
 many  years;  but  when  a  cry  is   heard  in   Minas  Anor,   and  the
 power  of  Sauron  grows  great  in  the  Middle-earth,  then  let  it be
 whetted." '                                                              

                                                  
                                                                          
  Finally, (ii) continues in pencil from the point reached ('... and then
 reject me at the gates again?'), and this was not struck out:             
                                                                          
  'They did not bid me to make any request,' said Boromir,                 
 'and asked only for the meaning of the words. Yet we are sorely         
 pressed, and if Minas Tirith falls and the land of Ond, a great,          
 region will fall under the Shadow.'                                       
  'I will come,' said Trotter. 'For the half-high have indeed set           
 forth, and the spoken days are near.' Boromir looked at Frodo             
 and nodded with sudden understanding.                                     
                                                                          
  The text ends here. In these earliest  workings it  is interesting  to see
 that  the  Sword  that  was  Broken existed  before the  story that  it was
 broken beneath Elendil as he fell: indeed it is not clear that at  first it
 was  indeed  Elendil's  sword,  nor  how  Valandur  (whose  sword  it  was)
 was  related  to  him  (though  it  seems  plain  that  he  was   a  direct
 descendant of Elendil: very possibly he was to be Isildur's son).         
  In the passage (iii) the final story of the  Broken Sword  is seen  at the
 moment  of  its  emergence.  Valandil appears  as the  son of  Isildur, and
 there is a  glimpse of  the later  story that  Valandil, the  youngest son,
 remained on account of his  youth in  Imladris at  the time  of the  War of
 the  Last Alliance,  that he  received the  sword of  Elendil, and  that he
 dwelt in Elendil's city of Annuminas.                                     
  As  my father first wrote  the present  text he  evidently meant  (p. 119)
 that Ilmandur (probably  the eldest  son of  Elendil) ruled  Osgiliath, the
 name  of  his  city being  appropriate to  his own  name (Ilmen,  region of
 the stars), as were the  cities which  they ruled  to his  brothers' names;
 but  Ilmandur  was removed  and Osgiliath  became Elendil's  city -  for in
 this text Elendil  sailed up  the Great  River (which  receives ephemerally
 the  name  Sirvinya  'New  Sirion',  displacing  Beleghir   'Great  River',
 VI.410)  and  established  a  realm  in  the land  about its  lower course.
 This  is  entirely  at  variance  with  the  story  found  much  earlier in
 Elrond's  conversation  with  Bingo  (see  p.  110;  VI.215  -  16),  where
 Elrond  told  that  Elendil was  'a king  in Beleriand',  that 'he  made an
 alliance with the Elf-king  of those  lands, whose  name is  Gilgalad', and
 that  their  joined  armies  'marched  eastward,  and  crossed   the  Misty
 Mountains,  and  passed  into  the  inner  lands  far  from  the  memory of
 the Sea.'                                                                 
  That text was very closely related  to the  end of  the second  version of
 The  Fall  of  Numenor  (V.28  -  9), and  used many  of the  same phrases.
 Subsequently  a  new  ending  to  The  Fall  of  Numenor  was  substituted;
 this has been given in V.33, but I cite it again here.                    
                                                                          
  But  there  remains  a  legend  of  Beleriand.  Now  that  land  had  been
  broken  in  the  Great   Battle  with   Morgoth;  and   at  the   fall  of
  Numenor  and  the  change of  the fashion  of the  world it  perished; for
  the  sea  covered  all  that  was  left  save some  of the  mountains that

 remained  as islands,  even up  to the  feet of  Eredlindon. But  that land
 where  Luthien  had  dwelt  remained,  and  was   called  Lindon.   A  gulf
 of  the  sea  came  through  it,  and  a  gap  was  made  in  the Mountains
 through  which  the  River  Lhun  flowed  out.  But  in  the land  that was
 left  north  and  south  of  the  gulf  the  Elves remained,  and Gil-galad
 son  of   Felagund  son   of  Finrod   was  their   king.  And   they  made
 Havens  in  the  Gulf  of Lhun  whence any  of their  people, or  any other
 of  the  Elves  that  fled from  the darkness  and sorrow  of Middle-earth,
 could  sail  into  the  True  West  and  return no  more. In  Lindon Sauron
 had  as  yet no  dominion. And  it is  said that  the brethren  Elendil and
 Valandil  escaping  from  the  fall  of  Numenor  came   at  last   to  the
 mouths  of  the  rivers  that  flowed  into  the  Western Sea.  And Elendil
 (that  is  Elf-friend),  who  had  aforetime  loved  the  folk  of Eressea,
 came  to  Lindon  and  dwelt  there  a  while,  and  passed   into  Middle-
 earth  and  established  a  realm  in  the  North.  But Valandil  sailed up
 the  Great  River  Anduin  and  established  another   realm  far   to  the
 South.  But  Sauron   dwelt  in   Mordor  the   Black  Country,   and  that
 was  not  very  distant  from  Ondor  the  realm  of  Valandil;  and Sauron
 made  war  against  all  Elves  and  all  Men  of  Westernesse   or  others
 that  aided  them,  and  Valandil  was  hard  pressed.   Therefore  Elendil
 and   Gil-galad   seeing   that   unless  some   stand  were   made  Sauron
 would   become   lord   of   [?all]   Middle-earth   they    took   counsel
 together,  and  they  made  a  great  league.  And  Gil-galad  and  Elendil
 marched   into   the  Middle-earth   [?and  gathered   force  of   Men  and
 Elves, and they assembled at Imladrist].                                   
                                                                           
 These three accounts can only be placed in this sequence:                  
                                                                           
      (I) Elrond's account to Bingo  (together with  the original  ending of
      the   second   version   of   The   Fall   of  Numenor):   Elendil  in
      Beleriand.                                                            
 (II)  The  present   text  (the   'third  version'   of  'The   Council  of
      Elrond'):  Elendil  comes  up  the  Great  River  and  founds  a realm
      in the South.                                                         
 (III)  The  revised   ending  of   The  Fall   of  Numenor,   cited  above:
      Elendil  comes  to  Lindon;   Valandil  his   brother  comes   up  the
      Great River and founds the realm of Ondor in the South.               
                                                                           
 That (I) is the earliest is shown of course by the  name Bingo;  that (III)
 followed  (II)  is  shown  by  the  names  Anduin  and  Ondor. But  this is
 hard to  understand: for  the story  seen emerging  in (II),  pp. 119  - 21
 above  - Isildur  and Anarion  the rulers  of Minas  Ithil and  Minas Anor,
 and Valandil Isildur's son surviving  and dwelling  in the  North -  is the
 story that endured into The Lord of the Rings.                             
 A  single  sheet   of  manuscript   found  in   isolation  bears   on  this
 question without aiding its solution; it is also of great interest in other
 respects.                                                                  

   After the 'breaking of the North' in the Great Battle, the                
 shape of the North-west of Middle-earth was changed. Nearly                 
 all Beleriand was drowned in the Sea. Taur na Fuin became an                
 Island. The mountains of Eredwethion &c. became small isles                 
 (so also Himling). Eredlindon was now near the Sea (at widest               
 200 miles away). A great gulf of the Sea came in through                    
 Ossiriand and a gap made in the Mountains through which '                   
 [the Branduinen flowed (later corrupted to Brandywine) >] the               
 Lhun flowed. In what was left between the Mountains and the                 
 Sea the Elves of Beleriand remained in North and South Lindon;              
 and Havens of Escape were made in the Gulf. The lord was                    
 Gilgalad (son of [struck out: Fin...] Inglor?). Many of his                 
 people were Gnomes; some Doriath-Danians.                                   
   Between Eredlindon and Eredhithui [written above: Hith-                   
 dilias) (Misty Mountains) many Elves dwelt, and especially at               
 Imladrist (Rivendell) and Eregion (Hollin). In Hollin there was a           
 colony of Gnomes, who would not depart. Down in Harfalas                    
 (or Falas) ...(15) the Black Mountains [Ered Myrn )] Eredvyrn                  
 (Mornvenniath) dwelt a powerful assembly of Ilkorins.                       
   Elendil and Valandil kings of Numenore sailed to the Middle-              
 earth and came into the mouths of the Anduin (Great River) and              
 the Branduinen and the Lhun (Blue River).                                   
                                                                            
   Here the name Anduin  shows that  this text  followed (II),  the present
 version  of 'The  Council of  Elrond'. Here,  as in  (III), Elendil  has a
 brother  Valandil  (and  they  are  called kings  of Numenore'),(16) and the
 meaning of the last sentence is presumably that, again  as in  (III), they
 came separately to Middle-earth and sailed up different rivers.             
   The  simplest  conclusion,  indeed  the   only  conclusion   that  seems
 available, is that my father  for some  time held  different views  of the
 coming of the Numenoreans, and pursued them independently.                  
   Other features of this text must  be briefly  noticed. That  it preceded
 (III) seems clear  from its  being at  first the  Branduinen (Brandywine),
 subsequently  changed  to  the  Lhun,  that flowed  through the  great gap
 in  Eredlindon (the  Blue Mountains),  whereas in  (III) Lhun  was written
 from the first. This indicates also that the text preceded that portion of
 the  original  map  (Map  I,  p. 302)  which shows  these regions.  On the
 other  hand  the statement  that Eredlindon  was now  at no  point further
 than  200  miles from  the Sea  agrees well  with that  map,(17) and  we meet
 here  an  apparently  unique  reference  to  the  isles  of  Tol  Fuin and
 Himling, which are shown on it.(18)                                         
   The  Misty   Mountains  receive   for  the   first  time   Elvish  names
 (Eredhithui,  Hithdilias),  as  do  the  Black  Mountains  in  the  South,
 afterwards  the  White  Mountains,   (Eredvyrn,  Mornvenniath);   and  the

 name  Eregion  of  Hollin  appears.  The  name  of Gil-galad's  father as
 first written cannot be interpreted; the fourth letter seems to be  an r,
 but the name is  certainly not  Finrod. Inglor,  though here  marked with
 a query, agrees with (III), which has Felagund; in the texts that  I have
 called (I) above he was a descendant of Feanor.                          
                                                                         
   I return now to the 'third version' of 'The Council of Elrond'.        
           The verse (if it was already a verse) that brought Boromir to
 Rivendell is lost in its earliest form with the lost  page (p.  120), but
 from what follows it  is plain  that it  referred to  the Sword  that was
 Broken, which was in  Imlad-ril, and  to 'the  half-high', who  will 'set
 forth' (cf. FR p. 259).                                                  
   There are several interesting names in this text.                      
   Khazaddum (p. 117) is here first  used -  in the  narrative -  of Moria
 (see V.274, VI.466),  but it  appears in  the original  sketch of  a page
 from  the  Book  of  Mazarbul:  see  VI.467  and  the  Appendix  to  this
 book, p. 458.                                                            
   The city of Osgiliath on the Great River  appears, with  the fortresses
 of  Minas  Anor  and  Minas  Ithil on  either side  of the  river valley,
 though their positions were originally reversed, with Minas Ithil  in the
 west  becoming  Minas  Tirith  and  Minas  Anor  in  the   east  becoming
 Minas Morgol.                                                            
   The  Bay  of  Belfalas  (replacing  at  the  time of  writing Ramathor,
 Ramathir)  here  first  appears  (see  VI.438-9).  On  the  name Sirvinya
 'New Sirion':of the Great River see p. 122.                              
   Imlad-ril is no doubt  the earliest  form and  first appearance  of the
 Elvish name of Rivendell; Imlad-rist which here replaced  it is  the form
 found  in  the  texts  given  on  pp.  123-4.  Imladris  is found  in the
 Etymologies (V.384, stem RIS).                                           
   With  Osforod  'the  Northburg'  cf. the  later Fornost  (Erain), 'Nor-
 bury (of the Kings)'.                                                    
                                                                         
   At  the  end  of  the  manuscript  there  are  a  few  lines concerning
 Bombadil:  '"I  knew   of  him,"   answered  Gandalf.   "Bombadil's  one
 name. He  has called  himself by  others, suiting  himself to  the times.
 Tombombadil's for the Shire-folk. We have seldom met." '                 
   Pencilled scribbles beneath  this, difficult  to interpret,  give other
 names  of  Bombadil:  Forn  for  the Dwarves (19) (as in  FR p.  278)., Yare
 for the  Elves, and  Iaur (see  the Etymologies,  V.399, stem  YA); Erion
 for the Gnomes; Eldest for m[en] (cf. FR p. 142:  'Eldest, that's  what I
 am').                                                                    
                                                                         
                            The Fourth Version.                           
                                                                         
 The next complete  manuscript of  the chapter  is a  formidably difficult
 document.  It  contains  pages  'cannibalised'  from the  second version,
 with just such elements retained from them as were still suitable, and it

                                  
                                                                         
 also contains later writing at  more than  one stage  in the  evolution of
 the  Council,  with  further emendation  on top  of that  clearly deriving
 from  different  times.  It  is  difficult to  determine how  this complex
 evolved;  but I  think a  good case  can be  made for  the account  of the
 evolution that I give here, in which a 'fourth' and a 'fifth'  version are
 separated out.                                                           
  On this  view, my  father now  decided that  the extremely  difficult and
 incomplete  'third  version',  introducing  so  much new  material, called
 for  an  ordered  text  in  clear  manuscript. The  chapter (XIV)  was now
 titled  The  Council  of  Elrond,  and  it  begins  (on  the  August  1940
 examination script) with a revised version  of the  opening (see  p. 110):
 Frodo  and  Sam  now  meet Gandalf  and Bilbo  sitting 'on  a seat  cut in
 the stone beside a turn in the path', as in FR (p. 252).  But there  is no
 further  development  at  this  stage  in the  membership of  the Council:
 the Elf of Mirkwood  is still  Galdor. Boromir  is now  'from the  city of
 Minas Tirith in the South'.                                              
  From the start of the Council itself, the 'third  version', taking  up at
 the words 'Much was said of  events in  the world  outside' (p.  117), was
 for  the  most  part  closely  followed,  though  with movement  in detail
 towards the expression in  FR. Gloin  is still  followed by  Galdor's news
 of  Gollum's  escape and  Gandalf's resigned  observations on  the matter.
 But  after  'And now  our tale  goes far  away and  long ago'  Elrond here
 adds:                                                                    
                                                                         
 'for all here  should learn  in full  the tale  of the  Ring. I  know,' he
 added   with   a   glance  at   Boromir,  who   seemed  about   to  speak.
 'You  think  that  you  should  speak  now  in  turn  after   Galdor.  But
 wait,  and  you  will  see  that  your  words  will  come  in  more  fitly
 later.'                                                                  
                                                                         
 This  passage  may  very  well  represent  what   was  contained   in  the
 missing rider referred to on p. 119.                                     
  Elrond's  brief account  of the  foundation of  the realm  of Ond  is not
 changed from the 'third version' (as emended: see  p. 119).  Elendil still
 established  it,  about  the  lower course  of the  Great River  (here not
 given any other name), and 'his chief city was Osgiliath, the  Fortress of
 Stars',  while  Isildur  and  Anarion  governed  Minas  Ithil   and  Minas
 Anor.  But  where  the previous  text has  (as emended)  'But the  sons of
 Elendil  did  not  return  from  the war  with Sauron,  and only  in Minas
 Anor  was the  lordship of  the West  maintained. There  ruled the  son of
 Anarion  and  his  sons  after  him' this  fourth version  greatly expands
 Elrond's speech:                                                         
                                                                         
 '... But Isildur, the elder, went with his father to the aid of          
 Gilgalad  in  the Last  Alliance. Very  mighty was  that host.'          
 Elrond paused for  a while,  and sighed.  'I remember  well the          
 splendour of their banners,' he said...                                  

    Elrond's  recollection  of  the  mustering  of  the  hosts  of  the Last
  Alliance,  and  Frodo's  astonished  interjection, now  reach the  form in
  FR (p. 256; for the earlier forms of the passage see p. 110); but after 'I
  have  seen  many ages  in the  West of  the World,  and many  defeats, and
  many fruitless victories' the new text proceeds:                          
                                                                           
  '... Such proved indeed the alliance of Gilgalad and Elendil.'            
    And  thereupon  Elrond  passed  to   the  tale   of  the   assault  upon
  Mordor  that  Frodo  had  heard  already  from  Gandalf   /  yet   not  so
  fully  or  so  clearly;  and  he  spoke  of  the   winning  of   the  Ring
  [changed  perhaps  at  this  time  to:  But  now  all  was  set  forth  in
  full,   and   memories   were   unlocked  that   had  long   lain  hidden.
  Great  forces  were  gathered  together,  even  of  beasts  and  of birds;
  and  of  all  living  things  some  were  in  either  host, save  only the
  Elves. They alone were undivided, and followed Gilgalad.(20)              
  Then  Elrond  spoke  of  the  winning  of  the  Ring],  and the  flight of
  Sauron,  and  the  peace  that  came  to  the  West  of  Middle-earth  for
  a time.                                                                   
    'Yet,'  said  Elrond,  'Isildur,   who  took   the  Ring,   and  greatly
  diminished  the  power   of  Sauron,   was  slain,   and  he   came  never
  back  to  Minas  Ithil,  in  the  Land  of Ond,  nor did  any of  his folk
  return.   Only   in   Minas   Anor   was    the   race    of   Westernesse
  maintained  for  a  while.(21) But  Gilgalad  was  lost,  and  Elendil was
  dead;   and   in   spite  of   their  victory,   Sauron  was   not  wholly
  destroyed,   and  the   evil  creatures   that  he   had  made   or  tamed
  were   abroad,   and   they   multiplied.    And   Men    increased,   and
  Elves   were   estranged   from   them;   for   the   people   of  Numenor
  decayed,    or   turned    to   dark    thoughts,   and    destroyed   one
  another;  and  the  world   worsened.  Osgiliath   fell  into   ruin;  and
  evil  men  took  Minas  Ithil,  and  it  became  a  place  of  dread,  and
  was called Minas-Morgol, the                                              
                                                                           
    It is at this  point that  the previous  manuscript breaks  off, through
  the loss of a leaf,  and does  not take  up again  till after  Boromir has
  declared  the  'dream-verse'  of  Minas Tirith,  concerning which  he came
  to Rivendell (p. 120).                                                    
                                                                           
  Tower of  Sorcery, and  Minas Anor  was renamed  Minas Tirith             
  the Tower of Guard. And these two cities stood opposed to one             
  another, and were ever at war; and in the ruins  of Osgiliath             
  shadows walked. So it has been for many lives of men. For the             
  men of Minas Tirith fight on, though the race of  Elendil has             
  long failed among  them. But  listen now  to Boromir,  who is             
  come from Minas Tirith in the Land of Ond.'                               

   'Truly  in  that  land,'  said  Boromir  proudly,  taking  up  the tale,
 'we  have  never  ceased  to   defend  ourselves,   and  to   dispute  the
 passage  of  the  River   with  all   enemies  from   the  East.   By  our
 valour  some  peace  and  freedom  has  been  kept  in  the  lands  to the
 West  behind  us.  But  now  we  are  pressed  back,   and  are   near  to
 despair,  for  we  are  beset  and  the  crossing  of  the River  has been
 taken.(22) And  those   whom  we   defend  shelter   behind  us,   and  give
 us much praise and little help.                                           
   'Now   I   am   come   on   an  errand   over  many   dangerous  leagues
 to  Elrond.  But  I  do  not  seek  allies  in  war;  for  the   might  of
 Elrond  is  not  in  numbers,  nor  do  the  High-elves  put  forth  their
 strength  in  armies.  I  come  rather   to  ask   for  counsel   and  the
 unravelling   of   hard   words.  A   dream  came   many  months   ago  to
 the  Lord  of  Minas  Tirith  in  the  midst  of  a  troubled  sleep;  and
 afterward  a  like  dream   came  to   many  others   in  the   City,  and
 even  to  me.  Always  in  this  dream  there  was  the  noise  of running
 water  upon  one  hand,  and  of  a  blowing  fire  upon  the  other;  and
 in the midst was heard a voice, saying:                                   
                    Seek for the Sword that was broken:                    
                  in Imlad-rist it dwells,                                 
                    and there shall words be spoken                        
                      stronger than Morgol-spells.                         
                And this shall be your token:                              
                  when the half-high leave their land,                     
                then many bonds shall be broken,                           
                  and Days of Fire at hand.                                
 Of these words none of us  could understand  anything,(23) until              
 after long seeking we learned that Imlad-rist was the elvish              
 name of  a far  northern dale,  called by  Men in  the North              
 Rivendell, where Elrond Halfelven dwelt.                                  
                                                                          
   The third version is then followed closely  (pp. 120  - 1,  passages (i)
 and (iii)) as far as 'but it has been ordained that you should have it for
 a while'; then follows in this fourth version:                            
                                                                          
   'Yes, it  is true,'  he said,  turning to  Boromir with  a smile.  'I do
 not  look  the  part,  maybe:  I  have  had a  hard life  and a  long, and
 the  leagues  that  lie  between  here  and  Ond  would  go for  little in
 the  count  of  my  wanderings.  I   have  been   in  Minas   Tirith,  and
 walked  in  Osgiliath  by  night,  and  even  to   Minas  Morgol   I  have
 been,  and  beyond.'  He  shuddered.  'But  my  home,  such  as   I  have,
 has  been  in  the   North;  for   Valandil  son   of  Isildur   was  har-
 boured  by  the  Elves  in  this  region  after the  death of  his father;

 and  he  went  at  last with  such of  his folk  as remained,  and dwelt
 in  Osforod  the  North-burg.  But  that   is  now   waste,  so   that  its
 very  foundations  can   scarce  be   seen  beneath   the  turf.   And  our
 days   have   ever   waned  and   darkened  through   the  years;   and  we
 are   become   a   wandering   folk,   few   and   secret   and   sundered,
 pursued   ever   by   the   Enemy,   and  pursuing   him.  And   the  sword
 has  never  been  reforged.  For  it  was  Elendil's,  and   broke  beneath
 him  in  his  fall;  and   it  was   brought  away   by  his   esquire  and
 treasured.  For  Elendil  said  in  his  last hour:  "This blade  shall not
 be  brandished  again  for   many  ages.   And  when   a  voice   is  heard
 in  Minas  Anor,  and   the  shadow   of  Sauron   grows  great   again  in
 Middle-earth, let it then be remade." '                                    
                                                                           
   It  seems  to  me  extremely  probable that  it was  here, very  near the
   point  where  the  draft third  version ended,  that my  father abandoned
   in its turn this fourth version, or more accurately  went back  over what
   he had  written, changing  the sequence  of the  speeches at  the Council
   and  introducing  much  new  material. He  then continued  to the  end of
   the chapter; and this is the fifth version.                              
    In the third  and fourth  versions, ending  (on this  view) at  much the
   same place, the sequence had been the same:                              
    (1)  Gloin's  account  of  the  return  to Moria  and the  messages from
   Mordor;                                                                  
    (2) Galdor's news of Gollum's escape;                                   
    (3)  Elrond's  story  ('But  now  our  tale  goes  far  away   and  long
   ago...');                                                                
    (4) Boromir and the 'dream-verse' of Minas Tirith;                      
    (5)  Aragorn  produces  the  Sword  of  Elendil,  and  Elrond  proclaims
   his  ancestry;  Frodo  says  'Then  it  belongs  to  you  as much  as me,
   or more!'                                                                
    (6)  Aragorn  speaks  of Valandil  son of  Isildur and  the life  of his
   descendants in the North.                                                
   The differences between  this structure  and that  of FR  are essentially
   that  in  the  final form  the story  of (Galdor)  Legolas comes  in much
   later,  and that  after Frodo's  exclamation in  (5) and  Aragorn's reply
   Gandalf  calls  on  Frodo  to  bring  forth the  Ring -  whereupon Elrond
   says 'Behold Isildur's Bane!'; this in turn leads to Aragorn's account of
   himself, Aragorn being followed by Bilbo's story and then Frodo's.       
    A  single  page  of  rough  drafting  shows  both  developments: Frodo's
   bringing  forth  the  Ring  at  this  juncture  and  Elrond's  naming  it
   'Isildur's Bane' (which would lead to the insertion of the name  into the
   'dream-verse', from which it was  at first  absent, p.  128), and  also a
   scheme  for  a  new  sequence.  In this,  after Aragorn's  explanation to
   Boromir of the Broken Sword (FR p. 260), there follows:                  
    (1) Bilbo's story; -                                                    

                            
                                                                        
  (2) Gandalf's account of the Rings, and of the identification of       
    Bilbo's Ring with Isildur's Bane;                                    
  (3) The story of the hunt for Gollum;                                  
  (4) Galdor's tidings of Gollum's escape;                               
  (5) Frodo's story;                                                     
  (6) 'Gandalf's captivity';                                             
  (7) 'Question about Tom Bombadil'.                                     
 Although  in FR  (2) was  very greatly  enlarged, and  embraces Aragorn's
 story (3), this is essentially the final sequence, with the  exception of
 (5):  in  FR  Frodo  follows  Bilbo.  An intervention,  following Frodo's
 story, by the Elf from the Grey  Havens (Galdor,  not yet  present) leads
 in FR to Gandalf's two long accounts (2)  and (6),  into which  (4) comes
 as an interruption.                                                     
  The sequence given  above is  found in  the fifth  version, to  be given
 (in  part) shortly;  and the  way in  which the  speeches at  the Council
 were relinked  to achieve  the final  sequence can  be understood  from a
 comparison of FR with the material presented here.                      
                                                                        
                              Gandalf's Tale.                             
                                                                        
 I  think  it  very likely,  indeed almost  certain, that  it was  at this
 juncture,  before  he  began  on  the  fifth version  of 'The  Council of
 Elrond', that my father finally set down  the full  story of  why Gandalf
 failed  to  return  to  Hobbiton  before  Frodo's  departure. Only  a few
 hints towards  this had  been put  in writing.  Saruman appeared  for the
 first time in the outline dated 26 - 27 August 1940 (pp.  70 -  1), where
 the  earliest  ideas concerning  him and  his role  emerge. He  dwells at
 Angrobel  or  Irongarth,  on  the  borders  of  Rohan;  he  'sends  out a
 message  that there  is important  news' (that  the Ringwraiths  had come
 forth  from   Mordor);  Gandalf   wants  his   help  against   them;  but
 Saruman has 'fallen and gone  over to  Sauron'. At  that stage  my father
 was  still  entirely  uncertain  what  in  fact  happened  to  Gandalf  -
 whether  he  was pursued  by the  Riders to  the top  of a  mountain from
 which  he  could  not  escape,  or   whether  he   was  handed   over  to
 Treebeard  and  imprisoned  by  him;  and  in  that  outline there  is no
 mention of his escape  from whatever  durance he  suffered. In  the brief
 scheme given on p.  116, however,  there is  mention of  'Gandalf's story
 of Saruman and  the eagle';  and the  question is  touched on  there, how
 did the  Eagles know  where to  seek for  Gandalf? -  unless he  had gone
 at  once  to  Rivendell  when he  left the  Shire in  June, and  had told
 Elrond of his intention.                                                
  Now at last the final story emerges; and the  earlier conception  of the
 Western  Tower,  an  Elf-tower  of  Emyn Beraid,  in which  Gandalf stood
 guarded  by  the  Ringwraiths  sitting  motionless  on  their  horses, as
 Frodo saw  them in  his dream  (see pp.  33 -  6), changes  into Orthanc,

     Saruman's  tower  within  the circuit  of the  'Irongarth'; and  Saruman is
     his captor.                                                                
       This first  draft, for  which my  father used  the blue  booklet-covers of
     the  'August  1940'  examination  script,  was  written  in his  most rapid
     handwriting,  in  which  words  were  often  reduced   to  mere   marks  or
     lines with slight undulations, and I have not been able to interpret  it at
     every  point.  But  this  original  text  of  Gandalf's  story  is  of much
     interest, and I give it here in full so well as I can. It will be seen that
     while the texture of the narrative is thinner  than in  the final  form (FR
     pp. 269 ff.), many essential features  were already  present. The  pages of
     the  manuscript  are  lettered  from  'b' onwards,  showing that  the first
     page is lost.                                                              
                                                                               
            'It has', said Gandalf, 'and I was about to give an account.(24)    
                                                                               
     At the end of June a cloud of anxiety came upon my mind and I              
     went through the Shire to its southern borders. I had long felt a          
     foreboding of some danger that was still hidden from me. I                 
     passed down the Baranduin as far as Sarn Ford, and there I met              
     a messenger. I found I knew him well, for he leapt from his                
     horse when he saw me and hailed me: it was Radagast who                    
     dwelt once upon a time near the southern borders of Mirk-                  
     wood.                                                                      
                                                                               
       Here my father broke off, and without striking out what he had           
     written began again in the course of the second sentence.                  
                                                                               
     and rode round the borders of the Shire, for I felt a foreboding           
     of some danger that was still hidden from  me. I  found nothing,           
     though I came upon many fugitives, and it seemed  to me  that on           
     many a fear sat of which they could  not speak.  I came  up from           
     the  South  and  along  the Greenway,  and not  far from  Bree I           
     came upon a man sitting by  the roadside.  His [?  dappled grey]           
     horse was standing  by. When  he saw  me he  leaped to  his feet           
     and  hailed  me.  It  was  Radagast  my  cousin,(25) who  dwelt once           
     upon a time near the southern  borders of  Mirkwood. I  had lost           
     sight of him for many years. "I am seeking you," he said. "But I           
     am a stranger in these parts, and I heard a rumour that you were           
     in a land called by a strange name: the Shire." "I was," said I,           
     "and you are near.... [?River] but [?far] to  East. What  do you           
     want with me so urgently?" For he is never a great traveller.              
       'He then told  me dread  news and  revealed to  me what  I had           
     feared  without  knowing  it. This  is what  he said.  "The Nine           
     'Wraiths  are  released,"  he  said. "The  Enemy must  have some           
     great  and  urgent need,  but what  it is  that should  make him           

                                 
                                                                   
 look to these desolate... parts where men and wealth are scanty
 I do not know.> <What do you mean?- said I. -The Nine are,         
 coming this way," he said. "Men and beasts are flying before '     
 them. [Added in pencil: They have taken the guise of horsemen,     
 clad in black as of old.)"                                         
  'Then my heart failed for a moment; for the Chief of the Nine     
 was of old the greatest of all the wizards of Men, and I have no '
 power to withstand the Nine Riders when he leads them.             
  '"Who sent you?" I asked. "It was Saruman the [Grey >]           
 White,"(26) he said, [added in pencil, <and he bids me say that         
 though the matter is too great for you he will help, but you must
 seek his help at once, and this seemed good to me"] and then I .
 had a light of hope. For Saruman the [Grey )] White is as you      
 know the greatest among us, and was chief of the White             
 Council. Radagast the Grey [in pencil > Brown] is of course a      
 master of shapes and changes of hue,(27) and has much lore of          
 beast, bird, and herb; but Saruman has long studied the works      
 of the Enemy to defeat him, and the lore of rings was his          
 especial knowledge. The last of the 19 rings he had....(28)            
  ' "I will go to Saruman," I said. "Then you must go now,"         
 said Radagast; "for the time is very short, and even if you set
 out this hour you will hardly come to him before the Nine cross
 the Seven Rivers.(29) I myself shall take my horse and ride away       
 now, since my errand is at an end." And with that he mounted       
 and rode off without another word - and that seemed to me          
 very strange. [Marginal addition: and would have ridden off        
 there and then. "Stay a moment, Radagast," I said. "We need        
 help of many kinds. Send out messages to all the birds and         
 beasts that are your friends. Tell them to bring news to Saruman
 and Gandalf. Let any message go to Orthanc."](30) But I could          
 not follow him. I had ridden far and Galeroc (31) was weary. I          
 stayed the night in Bree and departed at dawn - and if I ever see
 the [?innkeeper] again there will be no Butter left in Butterbur. I
 will melt the fat from him....(32) But bless him, he is a worthy       
 man and seems to have shown a stout heart. I shall probably        
 relent. However, being in great need I trusted him to send the     
 message to Frodo, and went off at dawn; and I came at last to      
 the dwelling of Saruman the White. And that is in Isengard, in     
 the north of the Black Mountains in the South.(33) There there is      
 a circle of sheer-sided hills that enclose a vale, and in the midst
 of the vale is a tower of stone that is called, Orthanc. I came to
 the great gate in the wall of rock and they said that Saruman      

 expected  me,(34) and  I  rode  in, and  the gate  closed behind,  and a
 sudden fear came on me.                                              
   'Saruman  was  there  but  he  had  changed.  He  wore  a   ring  on
 his  finger.  "So  you  have  come,  Gandalf,"  he said  to me,  and I
 seemed  to  see  a  deadly  laughter in  his eyes.  "Yes, I  have come
 for  your  aid,  Saruman  the White."  But that  title seemed  to fill
 him  with  anger.  "For  aid?"  he  said coldly.  "It is  seldom heard
 that  Gandalf  the  Grey  sought  for  aid,  one  so  cunning  and  so
 wise,   wandering  about   the  lands,   and  concerning   himself  in
 every business, be it his own or others".'                           
   '"But  now  matters  are  afoot,"  I  said,   "that  need   all  our
 strengths [?in union].  The Chief  of the  Nine is  guised as  a Rider
 in Black and his companions likewise. This Radagast told me."        
   '"Radagast  the  Brown,"   he  said,   and  shook   with  laughter.
 "Radagast  the  Simple,  Radagast  the  Fool.  [Added  in  pencil: Yet
 he  had  just  the wits  to play  the part  that I  set him.]  He must
 have  played  his  part  well  nonetheless.  For  here you  are [added
 in  pencil:  and that  is the  purpose of  the message].  And, Gandalf
 the  Grey,  here  you  will  stay.  For  I  am  Saruman:  Saruman  the
 Wise,  Saruman  of  many  colours.  For  white  cloth  may   be  dyed,
 and  the  white  page  overwritten,  and  the  white   light  broken."
 [Pencilled  in  margin   without  direction   for  insertion:   And  I
 looked  then  and  saw  that  his  robes  were not  white as  had been
 his  custom,  but  were  of  many  hues,   and  with   every  movement
 he changed hue.]                                                     
   ' "In which case  it is  no longer  white," I  said. "For  white may
 be  blended  of  many  colours,  but  many  colours  are  not  white."
 "You  need  not  speak to  me as  to one  of the  fools that  you make
 your  friends,"  he  said.  "I  have  not  brought  you  here   to  be
 instructed,  but  to  give  you  a  choice.  A  new power  has arisen.
 Against  it  there  is  no  hope.  With it  there is  such hope  as we
 never  had  before.  The  power  is  going  to  win. [Added  in margin
 without direction for insertion:  We fight  against it  in vain  - and
 in  any  case  foolishly; for  we have  looked always  at it  from the
 outside  with   hatred,  and   have  not   considered  what   are  its
 further  purposes.  We  have   seen  only   the  things   done,  often
 under necessity,  or caused  by resistance  and foolish  rebellion.] I
 shall grow as it grows, until all things are ours. In the end, I  - or
 toe,  if  you  will join  me -  may in  the end  come to  control that
 Power.  Indeed  why   not?  Could   not  we   by  this   means  accom-
 plish all, and more than  all, that  we have  striven for  before with
 the help of the weak Men and fugitive Elves?"                        

   ' "Be brief!" I said. "Name your choice! It is this, is it not? To
 submit  as you  have to  Sauron [alternative  reading: To  submit to
 you and to Sauron], or what?"                                       
   ' "To stay here till the end," said he.                           
   ' "Till what end?"                                                
   ' "Till the  Lord has  time to  consider what  fate for  you would
 give him most pleasure."                                            
   'They  took  me,'  said Gandalf,  'and placed  me on  the pinnacle
 of  Orthanc,  in  the  place  where  Saruman  of  old  was  wont  to
 watch the stars.  There is  no descent  but by  a narrow  stair. And
 the vale that was once  fair was  filled with  wolves and  orcs, for
 Saruman was there mustering  a great  force for  the service  of his
 new  master.(35) I had  no  chance  of  escape,   and  my   days  were
 bitter. For I had but little room in which to walk  to and  fro, and
 brood  on  the  coming of  the Riders  to the  North. But  there was
 always  a  hope  that  Frodo  had  set  forth as  I had  bidden, and
 would  reach  Rivendell  ere  the  inescapable  pursuit  began.  But
 both  my  fear  and my  hope were  cheated. For  I made  the mistake
 that others have made. I did not  yet understand  that in  the Shire
 the  power  of  Sauron would  halt and  fumble, and  the hunt  be at
 a  loss.  And  my  hope  was  founded  on an  innkeeper: one  of the
 best in the world, but not made to be a tool in high matters.'      
   'Who  sent  the  eagles?'  said  Frodo  eagerly, for  suddenly the
 strange dream that he had had came back to him.                     
   Gandalf  looked  at  him in  surprise. 'I  thought you  asked what
 had  happened to  me,' he  said. 'But  you seem  to know,  and don't
 need... the telling of my tale...'                                  
   'Your  words  have  recalled  a  dream,'   said  Frodo,   'that  I
 thought only a dream and had forgotten.'                            
   'Well,   said   Gandalf,   your  dream   was  true.(36) Gandalf  was
 caught like a fly in a spider's web; yet he is an  old fly  that has
 known  many  spiders.  I  was  not  content to  send a  message only
 to the Shire. At first I feared,  as Saruman  wished that  I should,
 that  Radagast  had  also  fallen.  But  it  is  not so:  he trusted
 Saruman,  who  had  not  revealed  his  purposes  to  him.  And  the
 very  fact  that  Saruman  had  so  successfully  deceived  Radagast
 proved the undoing of his scheme. For Radagast did as I bid.(37)    
 And  the  Eagles  of  the  Misty  Mountains  kept  watch   and  they
 saw  the  mustering  of  orcs,  and  got  news  of  the   escape  of
 Gollum, and  they sent  word to  Orthanc of  this to  me. And  so it
 was  when  the  moon  was  still  young  on a  night of  autumn that
 Gwaewar  the  Windlord (38) chief  of  the  eagles  came  to me; and I

 spoke  to  him  and  he  bore  me  away  before  Saruman  was aware,
 and the orcs and wolves that he released found me not.             
   ' "How far can you bear me?" said I to Gwaewar.                  
   ' "Many leagues,"  he said;  "but not  to the  ends of  the earth.
 Had  I  known  that  you  wished  to  fly   I  would   have  brought
 helpers. I was sent as the swiftest and as a bearer of [?tidings]."
   ' "Then I must have a steed," I said, "and  a steed  of surpassing
 swiftness; for I have never had such a need."                      
   ' "Then I will take you to Rohan," he said, "for  that is  not far
 off.  For  in  Rohan  [added:  the?  Riddermark]  the  Rohiroth (39) the
 horse-masters dwell still, and there are no  horses like  the horses
 of that land."                                                     
   ' "But are they yet to  be trusted?"  "They pay  tribute... yearly
 in  horses  to  Mordor,"  said  Gwaewar,  "but  they  are   not  yet
 under  the  yoke;(40) yet their  doom is  not far  off, if  Saruman is
 fallen."                                                           
   'I reached Rohan ere dawn, and  there I  got a  horse the  like of
 which I have never seen.'                                          
   'He is  indeed a  fine steed,'  said [Elrond  >] Aragorn;  'and it
 grieves  me  that  Sauron  should  have  such  tribute.  For  in the
 steeds  of  Rohan  there  is a  strain that  ... descended  from the
 Elder Days.'                                                       
   'One at least is saved,' said Gandalf;  'for there  I got  my grey
 horse,  and  I  name him  Greyfax. Not  even the  Chief of  the Nine
 could go  with such  tireless speed;  and by  day his  coat glistens
 like silver, and at night it is as unseen as a shadow. So  swift was
 my  going  from  Rohan that  1 reached  the Shire  within a  week of
 the  appointed  day,  and  I came  to his (41) home  and found  he was
 gone..I  found  in  fact  the  Sackville-Bagginses  there   and  was
 [?ordered  off].  I  went  to  the  Gaffer's  and  he  was  hard  to
 comfort;  but  I  had  need  of  comfort  myself,  for   amidst  his
 confused  talk  I  gathered  that the  Riders had  come even  as you
 left; and I rode  to Buckland  and all  was in  uproar; but  I found
 Crickhollow  broken  and  empty,  and  on  the  threshold  I  picked
 up a cloak that was Frodo's.                                       
   'That  was  my  worst  moment.  I rode  then on  the trail  of the
 Black Riders like  the wind,  and I  came behind  them as  they rode
 through  Bree.  They  threw  down  the gates...  and passed  by like
 a wind. The Breelanders I guess  are quaking  still, and  expect the
 end  of  the world.  This was  on the  night after  you had  left, I
 now  know.  Next  day  I  rode  on,  and  in  two  days   I  reached
 Weathertop,  and  there  I  found  two  of  the  Enemy  already, but

                                               
                                                                          
 they drew off before my [?wrath). But that night  ... gathered,           
 and I was besieged on the top, but I perceived they had not got           
 you.                                                                      
                                                                          
   The text ends with the  words: 'Fled  at sunrise'.  - With  only slight
 prevision  (as  it  appears),  a  massive new  element and  dimension had
 entered  the  history. There  were of  course certain  essential features
 lacking.  Most  important,  Saruman  was  not  acting   independently  of
 the  Dark  Tower  (see  note  35);  and while  Gandalf's great  ride from
 Rohan  on  'Greyfax'  now  enters,  there  is  no  suggestion   that  the
 relations of Rohan  with Mordor  will have  any especial  significance in
 the  story  (though those  relations are  now differently  conceived: see
 note  40)  -  and  Gandalf's  remark 'In  Rohan I  found evil  already at
 work' (FR p. 275) is absent.                                              
   The  story  of  Hamilcar Bolger's  ride with  Gandalf has  finally gone
 (see p. 75), as has that of Gandalf's visit to Tom Bombadil (see p. 111).
   A notable feature is  the evolution  of the  'colours' of  the wizards,
 Gandalf,  Saruman,  and Radagast,  which came  to the  final form  in the
 course of the writing of this draft. Saruman  is at  first 'the  Grey',(42)
 becoming  at  once  'the White',  and Radagast  immediately takes  on the
 epithet  'Grey'  (p.  132).  But  Gandalf  then  becomes 'the  Grey',(43) and
 Saruman calls Radagast 'the Brown' in the text as written on p. 133.      
                                                                          
                                   NOTES.                                  
                                                                          
   1. This text has been  put together  from pages  used in  a subsequent
       version  that  went  to  Marquette  University  and others  that were
       left behind.  Many changes  were made  to it  afterwards, but  in the
       citations that I make from it here I take account only of  those that
       were made in ink and at or very near to the time of composition.
   2. Elrond still says of Boromir that he 'brings  tidings that  must be
       considered', but as  in the  original version  (VI.409) we  are again
       not  told  what  they  were,  and  no  explanation  is  given  of his
       journey  to  Rivendell.  Subsequently   in  this   version,  however,
       Gandalf says that Boromir 'is resolved to  return as  soon as  he can
       to his own land, to the siege and war that he has told of.'         
   3. That  my  father  had  the  earlier text  before him  is shown  by the
       recurrence  here  of the  casual error  (which I  did not  observe in
       Vol.  VI)  'Elwing  daughter  of  Luthien':  Elwing was  the daughter
       of Dior, son of Luthien.                                            
   4. In  the  preceding  sentence,  'In  time  the Lord  of the  Ring would
       find out its hiding-place', just as in the first version  (VI.402 and
       note 25) Lord  of the  Rings was  first written  but changed  at once
       to Lord of the Ring.                                                
                                                                          
       Hobbit, was repeated. See pp. 159 - 60.                             

          
                                                                         
  6. See note 2.                                                          
  7. That  Bilbo  gave  Frodo  Sting  and  his  mailcoat  appears   in  the
     original  outline  for  'The  Council of  Elrond', VI.397.  Bilbo does
     not  here, as  he does  in FR,  produce the  pieces of  Frodo's sword,
     nor indeed refer to the  fact of  its having  been broken,  though the
     story of its being  broken at  the Ford  of Bruinen  goes back  to the
     beginning (VI.197). - The coat of  mail (which  Bilbo still  calls his
     'elf-mail') is described as 'studded with pale pearls'  ('white gems',
     FR); cf. the original text  of The  Hobbit, before  it was  changed to
     introduce 'mithril': 'It was  of silvered  steel, and  ornamented with
     pearls' (VI.465, note 35).                                           
  8. See p. 287 note 3.                                                   
  9. The illegible word probably begins with F and might be 'Fire'.       
 10. It  is  possible  that  the  Sword  that  was Broken  actually emerged
     from the verse 'All that is gold does not glitter':  on this  view, in
     the  earliest  form  of  the  verse  in  which  the  Broken  Sword  is
     referred to  (p. 80,  note 18)  the words  a king  may yet  be without
     crown,  A  blade  that  was  broken  be  brandished  were   no  more
     than a further exemplification of the general moral.                 
 11. Gollum's  escape,  though  only  now  emerging,  had  been   a  neces-
     sity of the story  ever since  Gandalf told  Bingo (VI.265)  that 'the
     Wood-elves  have  him in  prison', if  Gollum was  to reappear  at the
     end, as had long been foreseen (see VI.380 - 1).                     
 12. Afterwards  it  is  Treebeard  who  says this  (The Two  Towers III.4,
     p. 75): 'There is something very  big going  on, that  I can  see, and
     what it is maybe I shall learn in good time, or in bad time.'        
 13. Cf. the outline given  on p.  116: 'My  [i.e. Aragorn's]  fathers were
     driven  out  of  your  city  when  Sauron  raised  a  rebellion',  and
     'There Tarkil's sires had been King'.                                
 14. For previous uses of this dialogue in  other contexts  see pp.  50 and
     105 note 3.                                                          
 15. The  illegible  word  is  an  abbreviation,  perhaps 'bet.',  which my
     father used elsewhere for 'between';  if this  is what  it is,  he may
     have intended (the  manuscript is  very hasty)  to write  'between the
     Black  Mountains  and  the  Sea'. Harfalas  is not  named here  on the
     First Map (p. 309, map III).                                         
 16. Cf. p. 119: 'Of their kings [i.e. of the  Men of  Westernesse] Elendil
     was the chief.                                                       
 17. Text  (III),  the revised  ending to  The Fall  of Numenor,  says that
                                                                         
     'the  sea  covered  all  that  was  left ...  even up  to the  feet of
     Eredlindon'  (pp.  122  -  3),  but  this can  be accommodated  to the
     map  by  supposing  that  it  refers  to  the  northern extent  of the
     range (where it bent North-east).                                    
                                                                         
 18. In the  Introduction to  Unfinished Tales  (p. 14)  I said  that 'though
     the fact is nowhere referred to it  is clear  that Himring's  top rose
     above  the  waters  that  covered  drowned  Beleriand.  Some   way  to

      the west of it  was a  larger island  named Tol  Fuin, which  must be
      the  highest  part  of  Taur-nu-Fuin.' When  I wrote  that I  did not
      know of the  existence of  this text.  - The  later form  Himring had
      appeared  already  in  the  second  text   of  the   Lhammas  (V.177,
      189),  and  in  the  Quenta Silmarillion  (V.263, 268);  Himling here
      and  on  the map  are surprising,  but can  have no  significance for
      dating.                                                             
  19. This is Old Norse forn 'ancient'.                                   
  20. Cf. Of the Rings of Power, in  The Silmarillion  p. 294:  'All living
      things were divided  in that  day, and  some of  every kind,  even of
      beasts and birds, were  found in  either host,  save the  Elves only.
      They alone were undivided and followed Gil-galad.'                  
  21. In this text there is no  reference to  the death  of Anarion.  It is
      made clear that he did not go to the War of the Last Alliance.      
  22. Contrast  FR:  'But  if  the  passages  of the  River should  be won,
      what then?' In  FR (pp.  258 -  9) Boromir  describes the  assault on
      Osgiliath: 'A  power was  there that  we have  not felt  before. Some
      said  that it  could be  seen, like  a great  black horseman,  a dark
      shadow  under  the moon';  but 'still  we fight  on, holding  all the
      west  shores  of  Anduin'.  An  addition  to  the  present  text  may
      belong to this time or later: 'Nine  horsemen in  black led  the host
      of  Minas  Morgol  that  day and  we could  not withstand  them.' See
      p. 151.                                                             
  23. Here  the  'third  version' draft  takes up  again after  the missing
      page (p. 120).                                                      
  24. Cf. the next version (p. 149): ' "It has  much to  do with  it," said
      Gandalf, "and if Elrond is willing I will give my account now." '
  25. Cf.  The  Hobbit,   Chapter  VII   'Queer  Lodgings':   '  "I   am  a
      wizard,"  continued  Gandalf.  "I  have  heard  of  you, if  you have
      not  heard  of  me;  but  perhaps you  have heard  of my  good cousin
      Radagast  who  lives  near  the  Southern borders  of Mirkwood?"  ' -
      On Radagast's appearance in the story see p. 76 and note 15.        
  26. The  change  of  Grey  to  White  followed  the  same  change  in the
      next  sentence,  which  was  made  in  the act  of writing;  a little
      further on Saruman the White was written thus from the first.       
  27. Can   this  have   been  suggested   by  Beorn's   acquaintance  with
      Radagast? (see note 25).                                            
  28. I  cannot  make  out  the  two  concluding  words,  though  the first
      might  be  'gathered'.  But whatever  the words  are, the  meaning is
      clearly  that  Saruman  had  acquired  the  last of  the Rings  - and
      wore it on his finger, as appears subsequently in  this text  (cf. FR
      p. 271). - In the last text of 'Ancient History' that has  been given
      Gandalf  refers  to  the  discussion  of  the  Rings  at   the  White
      Council, and to those who 'go in for such things'; see p. 22.       
  29. The Seven Rivers: see pp. 310 - 12.                                 
  30. It is seen subsequently  (see note  37) that  this addition  was made

       while the writing of this text  was in  progress; and  it is  seen from
       the addition  that Radagast  first entered  the story  as the  means by
       which   Gandalf   was   lured   to   Saruman's  dwelling.   The  abrupt
       haste  of  Radagast's  departure  seemed  to  Gandalf  'very  strange',
       and  it  is  possible  that  when  first drafting  the story  my father
       supposed  that  Radagast's  part  was  not  simply  that   of  innocent
       emissary:  later,  at  Isengard, Saruman  says (p.  133) 'He  must have
       played  his  part  well  nonetheless'.  This  is  not  in FR.  When the
       addition   here   was  made,   Radagast  became   also  the   means  by
       which  the  Eagles  knew  where  to  find  Gandalf  (see  p.  130); and
       this  development  necessarily  disposed  of  the  idea  that  Radagast
       had   been  corrupted   -  but   Gandalf's  fear   that  he   had  been
       remains: 'At  first I  feared, as  Saruman wished  that I  should, that
       Radagast had also fallen' (p. 134; this  is preserved  in FR,  p. 274).
       - This is the first appearance of  the name  Orthanc, though  its first
       actual  use  in  the  narrative  is  probably  in  the  description  of
       Isengard that immediately follows.                                     
  31.  Galeroc: see pp. 68 and note 4, 70.                                    
  32.  The illegible words are perhaps 'fingers and all' ('butterfingers').
  33.  The  name  Isengard  first  occurs  here  (cf.  Angrobel  or Irongarth,
       p.  71),  and  it  is  placed,  not at  the southern  end of  the Misty
       Mountains, but in the north of the Black Mountains.                    
  34.  This is the first description of Isengard. - There is a faint pencilled
       addition  at  this  point:  'But  something strange  in their  look and
       voices  struck  me;  and  I  dismounted  from  my  horse  and  left him
       without.  And  that  was  well,  for' (here  the addition  breaks off).
       This  was  perhaps  a  thought,  abandoned  as  soon  as  written,  for
       some other  story of  Gandalf s  escape, and  his need  for a  horse to
       take  him  back  to  the  Shire. The  great speed  of Galeroc  had been
       emphasised  earlier  (p.  68:  'there  is  no  horse  in  Mordor  or in
       Rohan that is as swift as Galeroc').                                   
  35.  Cf.  FR  pp.  273-4:  'for  Saruman  was  mustering  a  great  force on
       his own account, in rivalry of Sauron and not in his service yet.'     
  36.  Before  writing  this  passage  about  Frodo's dream  (' "Who  sent the
       eagles?"...)  my  father  first  put  '  "And  how  did you  get away?"
       said  Frodo.'  It  was  thus  probably  at  this  very  point  that  he
       decided  to  introduce  Frodo's  vision  of  Gandalf  on  the  pinnacle
       of  Orthanc  into  his  dream  in  the  house   of  Tom   Bombadil  (FR
       p.  138;  for  previous  narratives  of  his  dream  on that  night see
       VI.118  -  20,  328).  His   vision  of   Gandalf  imprisoned   in  the
       Western Tower had also of course to be removed (see p. 35).            
  37.  It is seen from this  passage that  the addition  discussed in  note 30
       was put in while the draft was in course of composition.               
  38.  On the form Gwaewar (Gwaihir in LR) see V.301.                         
  39.  The  name  following  Rohan  is  very  unclear,  but  can  scarcely  be
       other  than  the  first  occurrence  of  Riddermark.  Rohiroth,  Rochi-

 roth is  found on  the earliest  rough map  of the  region, VI.439-40.
40.  Cf.  VI.422 (the  earliest text  of 'The  Ring Goes  South'): 'The
 Horse-kings have long been in the service of Sauron.'                 
41.  'his',  though  Frodo  has  not   been  mentioned,   because  'the
 appointed day' replaced 'Frodo's departure'.                          
42. In the plot dated 26 - 27 August 1940 (p. 70), where  Saruman first
 appears, he was 'Saramond the White or Grey Saruman'.                 
43. He calls himself 'Gandalf the Grey' in the version of his conversa-
 tion with Frodo at Rivendell cited on p. 82, but  that is  not earlier
 than the present text.                                                

                                    VII.                                  
                          THE COUNCIL OF ELROND (2).                       
                                                                          
                              The Fifth Version.                           
                                                                          
 A fifth version of  'The Council  of Elrond'  followed, and  is convenient-
 ly placed here, though it is not necessarily the case that  these revisions
 proceeded  in  unbroken  sequence  while  other   writing  remained   at  a
 standstill.  This  version  incorporated the  changed sequence  of speakers
 (pp. 129 -  30) and  Gandalf's story,  and changed  the history  of Elendil
 and his  sons; but  for this  rewriting and  reconstruction my  father made
 use  of existing  material, whence  arises the  extraordinarily complicated
 state  of  the  manuscript.  Many  emendations  were  made to  this version
 at different times. In this  case they  can be  readily separated  into two
 groups, on the basis of a  typescript that  was made  of the  fifth version
 after a certain amount of change had been carried out.                    
  This  typescript  was  very   carefully  and   accurately  made,   with  a
 remarkably small  number of  errors, seeing  that the  typist seems  not to
 have  been  well  acquainted  with   the  story:   the  name   Saruman  was
 typed  Samman  throughout (ru  and m  being very  similar or  identical in
 my  father's  handwriting).  Where  my  father missed  a needed  change (as
 Galdor  >  Legolas)  the  typist  dutifully set  down the  manuscript form.
 These characteristics  make the  typescript a  mirror of  the state  of the
 manuscript when  it was  made. This  is to  be sure  of only  limited value
 without  knowledge  of  when  that  was;  but  I  think  that   it  belongs
 clearly to this period.                                                   
  In those parts of the fifth version that are cited  here, I  indicate only
 those  subsequent   emendations  to   the  manuscript   (and  only   if  of
 significance) that appear in the typescript as typed.                     
                                                                          
  Gloin's story  was altered  in the  following way.  In the  third version,
 retained in the fourth,  he had  said: 'At  the last,  some score  of years
 ago,  Balin  departed, though  Dain did  not give  leave willingly,  and he
 took  with  him  Oin  and  Ori and  many of  our folk,  and they  went away
 south'  (p. 117).  This was  now replaced  by the  following, written  on a
 page of the 'August 1940' examination script.                             
                                                                          
 '... For Moria  was of  old one  of the  wonders of  the Northern         
 world. It is  said that  it was  begun when  the Elder  Days were         
 young,(1) and  Durin, father  of my  folk, was  king; and  with the         
 passing of the years and the labour of countless hands its mighty         

                                    
                                                                              
  halls  and  streets,  its  shafts  and  endless  galleries,   pierced  the
  mountains   from   east   to   west   and   delved    immeasurably   deep.
  But  under  the  foundations  of  the  hills   things  long   buried  were
  waked  at  last  from  sleep,  as   the  world   darkened,  and   days  of
  dread  and  evil  came.  Long  ago  the  dwarves   fled  from   Moria  and
  forsook   there   wealth   uncounted;   and   my   folk    wandered   over
  the  earth  until  far  in  the  North  they  made   new  homes.   But  we
  have  ever  remembered  Moria  with  fear  and  hope;   and  it   is  said
  in  our  songs  that  it  shall   be  re-opened   and  re-named   ere  the
  world   ends.   When   again    we   were    driven   from    the   Lonely
  Mountain,   Erebor,(2) in the   days  of   the  Dragon,  Thror  returned
  thither.   But   he   was   slain  by   an  Orc,   and  though   that  was
  revenged   by  Thorin   and  Dain,   and  many   goblins  were   slain  in
  war,  none  of  Thror's  folk,  neither  Thrain,   nor  Thorin   his  son,
  nor Dain his  sister-son, dared  to pass  its gates;  until at  last Balin
  listened  to  the  whispers  that  I  have  spoken  of,  and  resolved  to
  depart.  Though  Dain  did  not  give  leave   willingly,  he   took  with
  him  Oin  and  Ori  and   many  of   our  people,   and  they   went  away
  south. That was two score years ago.                                         
                                                                              
     This  passage,  of which  only a  trace remains  in FR  (pp. 253  - 4),
  reveals  the  development  of  new  conceptions  in  the  history  of  the
  Dwarves.  In  the  original  text  of  'The  Ring  Goes   South'  (VI.429)
  Gandalf  said  that  the  Goblins  drove  the  Dwarves  from   Moria,  and
  most  of  those  that  escaped  removed  into  the  North. This  must have
  been based  on what  was told  in The  Hobbit: in  Chapter III  Elrond had
  said that 'there are still forgotten treasures to be found in the deserted
  caverns of the mines of Moria,  since the  dwarf and  goblin war',  and in  ]
  Chapter  IV  there  was  a  reference  to  the  goblins having  'spread in
  secret  after  the  sack  of  the  mines  of Moria'.  Presumably therefore
  what my father said  in the  first version  of 'The  Ring Goes  South' was
  what  he  actually  had  in  mind  when  he  wrote  those passages  in The  1
  Hobbit: the Goblins drove the Dwarves out of Moria.                          
     If this is so, it was only now that a new story  emerged, in  which the
  Dwarves  left  Moria  for  an  entirely different  reason. In  the present
  passage  the  cause  of  their  flight  is  indeed  only  hinted  at  most
  obliquely:  'they  delved  immeasurably  deep',  and  'under  the  founda-
  tions of the  hills things  long buried  were waked  at last  from sleep'.
  With this compare LR Appendix A (III):                                      j
                                                                              
     The  Dwarves  delved  deep  at  that  time....  Thus  they  roused from
     sleep  a  thing  of  terror  that, flying  from Thangorodrim,  had lain
                                                                              
     of  the  West: a  Balrog of  Morgoth. Durin  was slain  by it,  and the

 year  after  Nain I,  his son;  and then  the glory  of Moria  passed, and
 its people were destroyed or fled far away.                               
                                                                          
 On this question see further pp. 185 - 6.                                 
 Concomitantly  with  this,  the  'dwarf  and  goblin  war'  took on  a new
 interpretation  and  history  (and  this was  why the  word 'sack'  in the
 sentence  quoted  from  Chapter  IV  of  The Hobbit  above was  changed in
 the third edition (1966) to 'battle'). It was the savage murder  of Thror,
 Thorin's grandfather, on his return to Moria, that led to  the war  of the
 Dwarves  and  the  Orcs,  ending in  the fearsome  victory of  the Dwarves
 in  the battle  of Azanulbizar  (Dimrill Dale),  described in  LR Appendix
 A (III). The passage in the present text, telling that Thror 'was slain by
 an  Orc,  and  though  that  was  revenged  by Thorin  and Dain,  and many
 goblins  were  slain in  war, none  of Thror's  folk, neither  Thrain, nor
 Thorin his son, nor Dain his sister-son, dared  to pass  [Moria's] gates',
 suggests that the essentials of the later story were now  already present.
 In  the  story  told in  LR Appendix  A (III)  Thorin played  an important
 part  in  the  battle,  and  from  his  prowess  derived his  name 'Oaken-
 shield'; and Dain slew Azog,  the slayer  of Thror,  before the  East Gate
 of  Moria.  This  latter  event  was  indeed  derived  from   The  Hobbit,
 where in Chapter XVII  Gandalf said  of Dain  that he  slew the  father of
 Bolg (leader of the Goblins in the Battle of Five Armies) in Moria.(3) It is
 further told in Appendix A (III) that after  the death  of Azog  Dain came
 down from the Gate 'grey in the  face, as  one who  has felt  great fear';
 and that he said to Thrain, Thorin's father:                              
                                                                          
 'You  are the  father of  our Folk,  and we  have bled  for you,  and will
 again.   But  we   will  not   enter  Khazad-dum.   You  will   not  enter
 Khazad-dum.  Only  I  have  looked  through  the   shadow  of   the  Gate.
 Beyond  the  shadow  it  waits  for  you  still:  Durin's Bane.  The world
 must   change  and   some  other   power  than   ours  must   come  before
 Durin's Folk walk again in Moria.'                                        
                                                                          
 It  appears  from  The  Hobbit  Chapter  XV  that Dain  of the  Iron Hills
 was  Thorin  Oakenshield's  cousin  (and  from   Chapter  XVII   that  his
 father  was  called Nain).  In the  present text  Dain is  called Thrain's
 sister-son. In the table given in LR Appendix A (III), however, he  is not
 Thrain's sister-son: his father Nain was Thrain's  first cousin,  and thus
 Thorin Oakenshield and Dain Ironfoot were second cousins.                 
                                                                          
 After  Elrond's  words  to  Gloin  'You  will learn  that your  trouble is
 only part of the trouble that we are here met to  consider' (cf.  p. 118),
 Galdor of Mirkwood no longer follows  (see pp.  129 -  30), and  the fifth
 version reads here:(4)                                                    
                                                                          
 'For  hearken  all!'  said  Elrond  in  a  clear  voice.  'I  have  called
 you  together  to  listen  to  the  tale of  the Ring.  Some part  of that

 tale is known to  all, but  the full  tale to  few. Other  matters may
 be spoken of,  but ere  all is  ended, it  will be  seen that  all are
 bound  up  with  the  Ring,  and  all  our  plans  and   courses  must
 wait  upon  our  decision  in this  great matter.  For, what  shall we
 do  with  the  Ring?  That  is  the  doom  that  we  must deem  ere we
 depart.                                                               
   'Behold,  the  tale  begins  far  away  and long  ago. In  the Black
 Years  that  followed  the  Elder  Days,  after  the  fall  of Numenor
 the  Men  of  Westernesse  returned  to  the  shores  of Middle-earth,
 as is recorded  still in  lore. Of  their kings  Elendil the  Tall was
 their  chief,  and  his sons  were Isildur  and Anarion,  mighty lords
 of  ships.  They  sailed  first  into  the Gulf  of Lindon,  where the
 Elf-havens  were  and  still   are,  and   they  were   befriended  by
 Gilgalad,  King  of  the High-elves  of that  land. Elendil  passed on
 into  Middle-earth  and  established  a  realm  in  the  North,  about
 the  rivers  Lhun  and  Branduin,  and  his  chief  city   was  called
 Tarkilmar  [>  Torfirion]   (or  Westermanton),   that  now   is  long
 desolate.  But  Isildur   and  Anarion   sailed  on   southwards,  and
 brought  their  ships  up  the  Great  River,  Anduin,(5) that  flows out
 of  Wilderland  and  finds  the Western  Sea in  the Bay  of Belfalas.
 In  the  lands  about  its  lower  courses  they  established  a realm
 where  are  now  the  countries  of  Rohan  and  Ondor.(6) Their  chief
 city  was  Osgiliath,  the  Fortress  of Stars,  through the  midst of
 which  the  river  flowed.  Other  strong  places  they   made:  Minas
 Ithil,  the  Tower  of  the  Rising  Moon,  to  the  eastward  upon  a
 spur  of  the  Mountains  of  Shadow;  and   Minas  Anor,   the  Tower
 of  the  Setting Sun,  westward at  the feet  of the  Black Mountains.
 But  Sauron   dwelt  in   Mordor,  the   Black  Country,   beyond  the
 Mountains  of  Shadow,  and  his  great  fortress,  the   Dark  Tower,
 was  built  above   the  valley   of  Gorgoroth;   and  he   made  war
 upon  the  Elves  and  the  Men  of   Westernesse;  and   Minas  Ithil
 was  taken.  Then  Isildur  sailed  away  and  sought  Elendil  in the
 North;  and  Elendil  and  Gilgalad  took  counsel   together,  seeing
 that  Sauron  would  soon  become  master  of  them  all, if  they did
 not  unite.  And  they  made   a  league,   the  Last   Alliance,  and
 marched  into  Middle-earth  gathering  great   force  of   Elves  and
 Men. Very mighty was that host.                                       
                                                                      
   It will be found that in this passage are the bones of a part of the
 narrative of the separate work  Of the  Rings of  Power and  the Third
 Age, which was published in The Silmarillion (see pp. 290 - 3). In the
 later development of 'The Council  of Elrond'  the chapter  became the
 vehicle of a far fuller account  of the  early Numenorean  kingdoms in

 Middle-earth, and much of this is now found not in The Lord of the        
 Rings but in Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age.                     
   Here the later story of Elendil enters (see pp. 122-4), in which
 Elendil remained in the North, whereas his sons sailed south down the
 coasts  of Middle-earth  and brought  their ships  up the  Great River.
 Elendil's  city  in  the  North  emerges,  afterwards Annuminas,  but here
 bearing   the   names   Tarkilmar   or   Westermanton:  on.   the  western
 portion of the First Map (pp. 304 - 5)  the Elvish  name is  Torfirion, to
 which  Tarkilmar  was  changed  on  the  present  manuscript.   In  Mordor
 the  valley  of  Gorgoroth  appears,  the  name  deriving  from  the  Ered
    Orgoroth  (Gorgoroth),  the  Mountains  of  Terror  south  of  Taur-na-
 Fuin  in  the  Elder  Days;  and  the  Mountains of  Shadow are  the first
 mention  of  the  later-named  Ephel  Duath,   the  great   chain  fencing
 Mordor on the West and South.                                             
    From 'Very mighty was  that host'  my father  returned to  and retained
 the pages of the preceding (fourth) version, pp.  126 -  8. The  result of
 this  combination  of  the new  passage just  given with  the text  of the
 fourth version was to repeat the taking  of Minas  Ithil. In  the original
 account  (pp.  119  -  20)  Elrond  told  that after  the war  with Sauron
 'as  the  world  worsened  and  decayed  Osgiliath  fell  into  ruin', and
 the servants of Sauron took the eastern city, so that  'it became  a place
 of  dread,  and  was  called   Minas  Morgol'.   In  the   fourth  version
 (pp. 126 - 7) this was repeated more fully and plainly; and  the structure
 of Elrond's story here can be summarised thus:
 - Isildur went to the War of the Last Alliance.
 - Elrond recalls the mustering of the hosts.
 - He tells of the war.
 - Isildur's  death;  'he  came  never  back  to  Minas  Ithil,  nor  did
 any  of  his  folk  return.   Only  in   Minas  Anor   was  the   race  of
 Westernesse   maintained  for a  while'.
 -   Despite   the   victory   over   Sauron,   the  world   worsened;  the
 Numen6reans    decayed    and    were    corrupted,     'Osgiliath    fell
 into  ruin;  and  evil  men  took  Minas  Ithil,  and  it  became  a place
 of dread, and was called Minas-Morgol'                                    
 But  in  the  fifth  version  the  structure  of  Elrond's  story becomes:
 -   Sauron   captured   Minas  Ithil.   Thereupon  Isildur   departed  and
 went north, and there followed the War of the Last Alliance.              
        (The     story     returns      to     the      fourth version).
 - Elrond recalls the mustering of the hosts.                              
        (&c. as in the fourth version)                                    
 This  is  the form  of the  story in  the typescript  made from  the fifth
 version.  It is  not clear  to me  whether my  father fully  intended this
 result. As the fifth version stands,  Minas Ithil  was captured  by Sauron
 before the War of the Last Alliance, and  indeed its  capture was  a prime
 cause of the making of the league; yet it is still said that Isildur 'came
 never back to Minas Ithil', and it is still told that  long after  the war

  'evil  men  took  Minas Ithil'.  This is  of course  perfectly explicable:
  when   Sauron   was   cast  down   Minas  Ithil   was  retaken   from  his
  servants, and only much later  did the  'evil men'  repossess it.  But one
  might  expect  this  to  have  been  made  explicit;  and  the  impression
  remains  of  a  'doubled'  account  arising  from  the  use of  the fourth
  version material at this point.                                           
    However  this may  be, it  is curious  that the  history of  Minas Ithil
  never  was  made  entirely  explicit.  In Of  the Rings  of Power  and the
  Third Age nothing is said of its retaking after the war, nor indeed of its
  history  until  the  time of  the great  plague that  came upon  Gondor in
  the  seventeenth  century  of  the  Third  Age,  when  'Minas   Ithil  was
  emptied of its people' (The Silmarillion p. 296).                         
                                                                           
    Various  changes  were  made  to  the  manuscript,  which  is  common to
  both fourth and fifth versions, in this part of the chapter  (extending as
  far  as  'it  has  been ordained  that you  should have  it for  a while',
  p. 128). These  changes were  apparently made  at different  times; those
  that were taken up into the typescript (see p. 141) are given here.       
    Elrond now says that 'It was even at Imladris,  here in  Rivendell, that
  they  were  mustered'.  Ond  becomes  Ondor  (see  note  6),   and  Minas-
  Morgol   becomes  Minas-Morghul.   The  sentence   'Only  in   Minas  Anor
  was  the race  of Westernesse  maintained for  a while'  was cut  out, and
  the following inserted at this point: 'And Anarion was slain in  battle in
  the valley of Gorgoroth' (see p. 127  and note  21). In  the 'dream-verse'
  of  Minas  Tirith  Imlad-rist  was  altered to  Imlad-ris, and  the second
  half of the verse was changed to read:                                    
                         This sign shall there be then                      
                         that Doom is near at hand:                         
                      The Halfhigh shall you see then                       
                         with Isildur's bane in hand.                       
  On Isildur's bane see pp. 129 - 30. At every occurrence of Trotter or     
  Aragorn in this passage, and throughout the manuscript, the name          
  Elfstone was written in, and is the name found in the typescript, and     
  Aragorn son of Kelegorn becomes Elfstone son of Elfbelm (cf. p. 80        
  note 17, and for discussion of this question see pp. 277 - 8).            
    But at Aragorn's words 'it has been ordained that you should have it
  for a while' the new structure enters, with ' "Bring out the Ring,        
  Frodo!" said Gandalf solemnly' (see pp. 129 - 30), and the text that      
  follows in FR (pp. 260 - 1) is all but achieved. It is (significantly) not
  said that 'Boromir's eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing'; but
  Aragorn's explanation to him of the meaning of the 'Sword that was        
  broken' in the 'dream-verse' is as in FR, with his reference to the       
  prophecy that it should be re-made when Isildur's Bane was found,         
  and he ends 'Do you wish for the house of Elendil to return to the land
  of Ond [> Ondor]?'(7) Bilbo in irritation at Boromir's doubtfulness of      
  Aragorn 'bursts out' with the verse All that is gold does not glitter (8) 

  ('"I  made  that  up  for Tarkil  [> Elfstone],"  he whispered  to Frodo
  with a  grin, "when  he first  told me  his long  tale" ').  But Aragorn's
  speech to Boromir (cf. pp. 121, 128) is still substantially different from
  that in FR, and lacks much that he afterwards said.                       
                                                                           
    Aragorn   [>   Elfstone]  smiled;   then  he   turned  again   to  Boro-
  mir. 'I do not look the  part, truly,'  he said;  'and I  am but  the heir
  of  Elendil,  not Elendil  himself. I  have had  a hard  life and  a long;
  and  the  leagues  that  lie  between  here  and  Ond  [>  Ondor]   are  a
  small  part  in  the   count  of   my  journeys.   I  have   crossed  many
  mountains,   and   many   rivers,   and   trodden   many    plains,   even
  into  far  regions  where  the  stars are  strange. I  have been  in Minas
  Tirith  unknown,(9) and  have  walked   in  Osgiliath   by  night.,   and  I
  have    passed    the   gates    of   Minas-Morgol    [>   Minas-Morghul];
  further  have  I  dared  even  to  the  Dark  Borders,  and   beyond.  But
  my  home,  such  as  I  have,  is  in the  North. For  Valandil, Isildur's
  son,  was  harboured  by  the  Elves  in  this  region  when   his  father
  was  lost;  and  he went  at last  with such  of his  folk as  remained to
  him,  and  dwelt   in  Osforod   [>  Fornobel],(10) the  North   Burg.  But
  that  is  now  waste,  and  the  foundations  of its  walls can  scarce be
  seen beneath the turf.                                                    
    'Our   days   have   ever   waned  and   darkened  through   the  years,
  and  we  are  dwindled   to  a   wandering  folk,   few  and   secret  and
  sundered,  pursued  ever   by  the   Enemy.  And   the  sword   has  never
  yet  been  re-forged,  for  Isildur's  Bane  was  lost.  But  now   it  is
  found and the hour has come. I will return to Minas-Tirith.'              
                                                                           
      At the end of Aragorn's speech the fourth version of 'The Council of
  Elrond' ended (p. 129). The fifth version continues:                      
                                                                           
    'And  now,'  said  Elrond,  'the  tale  of  the  Ring  comes   down  the
  years.  It  fell  from  Isildur's  hand  and  was lost.  And it  shall now
  be  told  in  how  strange  a  manner  it  was  found.  Speak  Bilbo!  And
  if  you  have  not  yet  cast  your  story  into verse,'  he added  with a
  smile, 'you may tell it in plain words.'                                  
    To   some   of   those   present   Bilbo's  tale   was  new,   and  they
  listened   with   amazement   while   the   old   hobbit   (not   at   all
  displeased)  retold  the  story   of  his   adventure  with   Gollum,  not
  omitting a single riddle.                                                 
    Then  Gandalf  spoke,   and  told   of  the   White  Council   that  had
  been  held  in  that  same  year,  and  of  the  efforts  that   had  been
  made   to   drive   the   Necromancer   from   Mirkwood,   and   how  that
  had  failed  to  check  the  growth  of  his  power.  For  he   had  taken
  again   his   ancient  name,   and  established   a  dominion   over  many

 men,  and  had  re-entered  Mordor.  'It  was   in  that   year,'  said
 Gandalf,  'that  rumour  first  came   to  us   that  he   was  seeking
 everywhere  for  the  lost  Ring; and we (11) gathered  such lore  as we
 could  from  far  and  wide  concerning  its  fashion  and  properties,
 but  we  never  thought  that  it  would  be found  again to  our great
 peril.'  Gandalf  spoke  then  of  the  nature  and  powers of  the One
 Ring;  and  how  it  had  at  last  become  clear  that  the   ring  of
 Gollum was indeed Isildur's Bane, the Ruling Ring.                     
   He  told  how  he  had  searched  for  Gollum;  and  then  the  story
 was  taken  up  first  by  Galdor  [>  Legolas]  of   the  Wood-elves,(12)
 and  in  the end  by Aragorn  [> Elfstone].  For in  that chase  he had
 made  a  perilous  journey  following  the trail  from the  deep places
 of   Mirkwood    through   Fangorn    Forest   and    the   Riddermark,
 Rohan   the   land   of   Horsemen,   and    over   the    Dead   Marsh
 [> Marshes] to the very borders of the land of Mordor.                 
   'And there I lost the trail,'  he said,  'but after  a long  search I
 came  upon  it  again, returning  again northwards.  It was  lurking by
 a  stagnant  pool,  upon  the  edge  of  the  Dead  Marsh  [> Marshes],
 that  I  caught  Gollum;  and   he  was   covered  with   green  slime.
 I  made  him  walk  before  me,  for  I  would   not  touch   him;  and
 I   drove   him   towards   Mirkwood.   There  I   gave  him   over  to
 Gandalf  and  to  the care  of the  Elves, and  was glad  to be  rid of
 his  company,  for  he  stank.  But  it  is  as  well  that  he  is  in
 safekeeping.  We  do  not  doubt  that  he  has  done  great  harm, and
 that  from  him  the  Enemy  has learned  that the  Ring is  found; but
 he might well do further  ill. He  did not  return, I  am sure,  of his
 own  will  from  Mordor,  but  was  sent  forth  from  there to  aid in
 the design of Sauron.'                                                 
   'Alas!'  said  Galdor  [>  Legolas] interrupting,  'but I  have news
 that must now be told.  It is  not good,  I fear;  but how  ill, others
 must  judge.  All  that  I have  heard warns  me that  you may  take it
 amiss. Smeagol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.'                
   'What!'  cried  Aragorn  [>  Elfstone]   in  angry   surprise.  'Then
 all my  pains are  brought to  nothing! I  judge that  to be  evil news
 indeed.  You  may  mark  my  words:  we  shall  all rue  this bitterly.
 How came the Wood-elves to fail in their trust?'                       
                                                                       
   Galdor's story, which was already close (see pp. 118 - 19) to that in
 FR, now moves still closer in  detail of  expression. Gandalf  s rather
 resigned  comments  on  Gollum's  escape  remain  as  they   were;  now
 however he ends by saying: 'But now it is  time that  the tale  came to
 Frodo' (on the sequence here see  p. 130).  Frodo's story,  and Bilbo's
 remarks about  it, are very  much as  in FR,  where they  come in  at a

                  
                                                                             
  different  point,  pp.  262  -  3:  here his  brief conversation  with Bilbo
  forms  the  link  to  Gandalf's  story,  which  is  given  a heading  in the
  manuscript,                                                                 
                                                                             
                                Gandalf's tale.                              
                                                                             
      'There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!'           
      'Yes, it made quite a  long tale,'  answered Frodo;  'but the           
  story doesn't seem complete to  me. I  still want  to know  a good          
  deal.'                                                                      
      'And what question  would you  ask?' said  Elrond, overhearing          
  him.                                                                        
      'I should like to know what happened to Gandalf after  he left          
  me, if he is willing to tell me now. But perhaps it has nothing to          
  do with our present business.'                                              
      'It has much to do with it,' said Gandalf,  'and if  Elrond is          
  willing I will give my account now. At the end of June a  cloud of          
  anxiety came upon my mind...                                                
                                                                             
      Gandalf's story in this version is still fairly close to the preliminary
  draft (pp. 131 -  5), but  the writing  is much  developed towards  the form
  in  FR.  A  detailed  comparison of  the three  would take  a great  deal of
  space, but I notice here all the chief features of difference.              
      Gandalf  now calls  Radagast his  'kinsman', not  his 'cousin',  and his
  dwelling  is  named  (but  by  an addition  to the  manuscript: see  p. 164)
  Rhosgobel; he still  says that  the Nine  Wraiths 'have  taken the  guise of
  Riders in black, as of old'  (this was  a pencilled  addition to  the draft,
  p.  132);  he  does  not name  them Nazgul.  Gandalf says  of the  'fell cap-
  tain of the Nine'  that he  was 'a  great king  of old';  and of  Saruman he
  says:                                                                       
                                                                             
  ... For Saruman the White is, as some of you know, the greatest             
  of my craft, and was the  leader in  the White  Council.... But             
  Saruman long studied the arts of the Enemy, and was  thus often             
  able to defeat him; and the lore of rings was one of  his chief             
  studies. He knew much of the history [of the rings of  power >]             
  of  the  Nine Rings  and the  Seven, and  somewhat even  of the             
  Three and the One; and it was at one time rumoured that  he had             
  come near the secret of their making.                                       
                                                                             
  Radagast tells Gandalf that 'even if  you set  out from  this spot  you will
  hardly  reach  him  before  the Nine  have crossed  the seventh  river' (cf.
  p 132). Gandalf's horse, formerly Galeroc, is not now named.                
      Isengard is still in the Black Mountains,  but is  now defined  as being
  'not far from the great vale that lies between  them and  the last  hills of
  the  Misty  Mountains,  in  that  region  which  is  known  to  some  as the

 Gap  of  Rohan'  (which  is  here  first named);  and of  Orthanc Gandalf
 now says that in the midst of  the valley  of Isengard  'is the  tower of
 stone called Orthanc, for it was made by Saruman, and  it is  very great,
 and has many secrets, but it looks not to be a work  of craft.  It cannot
 be reached save by passing the circle of Isengard, and  in that  there is
 only one gate.' The implication of the word for  in 'for  it was  made by
 Saruman'  is  that  the  tower  was called  Orthanc (Old  English orpanc
 'artifice, device, work of craft') because it  was such  (it was  made by
 Saruman); yet it did not look to be.                                    
   Saruman  says  nothing  of  Gandalf's  having  concealed  from  him  'a
 matter of greatest import' (FR p. 272); and Gandalf still says as  in the
 draft  (p. 133):  'For white  may be  blended of  many colours,  but many
 colours are not white', not 'And he that breaks a thing to find  out what
 it is has left the path of wisdom'.                                     
   Saruman's  declamatory  and  visionary  speech   to  Gandalf   at  this
 stage may be cited in full:                                             
                                                                        
   'He stood up then, and began to declaim as if he were                 
 speaking to many: "A new Power has arisen. Against it, there is .       
 no hope. With it, there is such hope as we never had before.            
 None can now doubt its victory, which is near at hand. We               
 fought it in vain - and foolishly. We knew much but not                 
 enough. We looked always at it from the outside and through a           
 mist of old falsehood and hate; and we did not consider its high        
 and ultimate purpose. We saw not the reasons, but only the              
 things done, and some of those seemed evil; but they were done          
 under necessity. There has been a conspiracy to hinder and              
 frustrate knowledge, wisdom, and government. The Elder Days             
 are gone. The Middle Days are passing. The Younger Days are             
 beginning. The day of the Elves is over. But Our Days are               
 begun! The Power grows, and I shall grow as it grows, until all         
 things are ours. And listen, Gandalf my old friend," he said,           
 coming near and speaking now suddenly in a soft voice. "In the          
 end, I - or we, if you will join with me - we may come to               
 control that Power. We can bide our time. We can keep our               
 thoughts in our hearts. There need not be any real change of            
 purpose - only of method. Why not use this new strength? By it          
 we may well accomplish all and more than all that we have               
 striven to do with the help of the weak and foolish. And we shall       
 have time, more time. Of that I can assure you."(13)                    
   ' "I have heard this before, but in other places," I said. "I do      
 not wish to hear it again. All that I wish to hear is the choice        
 that I am offered. One half at least is already clear. I am to          
 submit to you and to Sauron, or - what?"                                

 ' "To stay here till the end," he said.                                  
 ' "Till what end?"                                                       
 ' "Till the Power is complete, and the Lord has time to turn to          
 lighter  matters:  such as  the pleasure  of devising  a fitting  end for
 Gandalf the Grey."                                                       
 '  "There  is  a  chance  that  I  may  not  prove  one  of  the  lighter
 matters,> said  I. I  am not  given to  idle boasting.,  but I  came near
 it then.'                                                                
                                                                         
 At  this  point,  separate from  the text  but I  think belonging  to the
 same time, my  father wrote:  'I don't  suppose my  fate would  have been
 much  different  if  I  had  welcomed his  advance; but  I have  no doubt
 that Saruman will prove a faithless ally;  and less  doubt that  the Dark
 Lord knows  it, well.'  This was  marked with  a query;  and it  does not
 appear in the typescript text (see note 16). - Saruman is of course still
 'mustering a great force for the service of  his new  master', as  in the
 draft (p. 134 and note 35).                                              
 Frodo's  interruption  concerning  his   dream  is   now  given   in  two
 forms, marked as alternatives. The first reads:                          
                                                                         
 'I  saw you!'  said Frodo,  'walking backwards  and forwards:           
 the moon shone in your hair.'                                            
 Gandalf  looked  at  him  in amazement.  'Wake up,  Frodo,' he           
 said, 'you are dreaming.'                                                
 'I was dreaming,'  said Frodo.  'Your words  suddenly recalled           
 a dream I had. I thought it was only a dream and had forgotten           
 it. I think it was in Bombadil's house. I saw a shadow - '               
 'That's enough!' laughed Gandalf. 'It was a dream, but  a true           
 one, it seems. However, the story  is mine,  and you  need not           
 spoil the telling of it.'                                                
                                                                         
 This was rejected in favour of the  second version,  which begins  in the
 same way and follows with the dialogue preserved in FR (p. 274).         
 The  Eagles  of  the  Misty  Mountains are  now said  by Gandalf  to have
 seen, not 'the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the lands',  as in
 FR, but 'the  Nine Riders  driving back  the men  of Minas  Tirith'. This
 goes with the  addition to  Boromir's speech  given on  p. 138,  note 22,
 where  he  speaks  of  the nine  horsemen in  black who  led the  host of
 Minas  Morgol  when  the  crossing  of  the Anduin  was taken.  The Eagle
 who  came  to  Orthanc  is   still  Gwaewar   (and  also   Gwaiwar),  not
 Gwaihir, but he is now called 'swiftest of the Great Eagles',  not 'chief
 of the eagles' as in the  draft. In  Gandalf's conversation  with Gwaewar
 as  they  flew  from  Isengard  Rohan  was  first called  the Horsermark,
 changed  at  once  to  the  Riddermark; the  men of  Rohan are  still the
 Rohiroth.  Gandalf still  makes no  reference to  his having  found 'evil
 already at work' in Rohan (see  p. 136).  Aragorn says  of the  horses of

  Rohan  that  'in them  is a  strain that  is descended  from the  days of
  Elendil', not 'from the  Elder Days';  and of  the horse  that he  got in
  Rohan Gandalf says, One at least is  saved. He  is a  grey horse  and was
  named  Halbarad,(14) but I  have called  him [Greyfax  changed at  once to]
  Shadowfax.  Not  even  the  horses  of  the  Nine  are  so  tireless  and
  swift....'                                                               
    When  Gandalf  came  to  Crickhollow  'hope  left  me;  till   I  found
  Hamilcar Bolger. He was still shaking like a leaf, but he had the wits to
  rouse all the Brandybucks.' This was changed  at the  time of  writing to
  the reading of FR (p. 276):  'and I  did not  wait to  gather news,  or I
  might  have  been  comforted.'  His  thought  of  Butterbur  is expressed
  thus: ' "Butterbur they call him," thought I; "but he  will be  plain Bur
  when  I leave  him, or  nothing at  all: I  will melt  all the  butter in
  him..." ' His account of his visit to  Bree and  his ride  to Weathertop,
  and the siege of him there by the Riders, reached  almost the  final form
  (FR p. 277): his defence by fire ('such light and flame cannot  have been
  seen on Weathertop since  the war-beacons  of old')  now at  last appears
  (see p. 56).                                                             
    Lastly,  Gandalf  s  journey  from  Weathertop  to  Rivendell,  'up the
  Hoarwell  and  through  the Entish  lands', took  him ten  days -  'I was
  only three days ahead of you  at the  end of  the chase';(15) and  he makes
  no  further  mention  of  Shadowfax  (in  FR  he  'sent  him back  to his
  master', since he could not ride him on that journey).                   
                                                                          
    At the end of Gandalf's tale there follows:                            
                                                                          
    There  was  a  silence.  At  last  Elrond spoke  again. 'This  is grave
  news  concerning  Saruman,'  he  said.  'All  trust  is  shaken  in these
  days.  But  such  falls  and  betrayals,  alas!  have  happened before.(16)
  Of  all  the  tales the  tale of  Frodo was  most strange  to me.  I have
  known  few  hobbits  save  Bilbo  here;  and  it  seems  to  me  now that
  he  is  perhaps  not  so  alone  and  singular  as  I  had  thought.  The
  world   has   changed  much   since  I   was  last   in  the   West.  The
  Barrow-wights   we   knew   of   by   many   names;(17) and  of   the  Old
  Forest,  that  was  once  both  ancient  and   very  great,   many  tales
  have been told; but never before have I heard tell of this strange  ]
  Bombadil. Is that his only name? I would like to know  more of           
  him. Do you know him, Gandalf?'                                          
    'I knew of him,' answered the wizard. 'Bombadil is one name.           
  He has  called himself  others, suiting  himself to  times and           
  tongues. Tom-bombadil's for the Shirefolk; Erion is  for Elves,           
  Forn  for  the  dwarves,  and  many  names  for men.(18) We have           
  seldom met. I am a  rolling-stone and  he is  a moss-gatherer.           
  There is work for both, but they seldom  help one  another. It           
  might have been wise to have sought his aid, but I do not think I  

                                                                       
                                                                        
 should   have   gained   much.(19) He   is   a   strange   creature,   and
 follows  his  own  counsels  -  if  he  has   any:  chance   serves  him
 better.'                                                                
   'Could   we   not   now  send   messages  to   him,  and   obtain  his
 help?'  asked  Erestor.  'It seems  that he  has a  power even  over the
 Ring.'                                                                  
   'That  is  not  quite  the  way of  it,' said  Gandalf. 'The  Ring has
 no  power  over  him,  or  for  him:  it  cannot  either cheat  or serve
 him.  He  is  his  own  master.  But  he has  no power  over it,  and he
 cannot  alter  the  Ring  itself,  nor  break  its  power  over  others.
 And  I  think  that  the  mastery  of  Bombadil  is  seen  only  on  his
 own   ground,   from   which   he   has   never   stepped    within   my
 memory.'(20)                                                            
                                                                        
   The discussion of  what to  do with  the Ring  is much  developed from
 the original form (VI.402 -  3), which  had been  little changed  in the
 second version; but it remains far from the debate in FR (pp. 279 - 80).
 It is still Gandalf, not as in FR Glorfindel, who expounds  the ultimate
 futility  of  entrusting  the  Ring  to  Bombadil,  since  he  could not
 withstand the assault of the Dark Lord (cf. p. 112); but then follows in
 the new version:                                                        
                                                                        
   'In  any  case,' said  Glorfindel, 'his  ground is  far away;  and the
 Ring  has  come  from  his  house  hither  only  at  great   hazard.  It
 would  have  to  pass  through  far  greater  peril  to  return.  If the
 Ring is to be hidden, it is here  in Rivendell  that we  must hide  it -
 if  Elrond  has  the  might  to withstand  the coming  of Sauron  at the
 last, when all else is conquered.'                                      
   'I have not the might,' said Elrond.                                  
   'In that  case,' said  Glorfindel, 'there  are but  two things  for us
 to  attempt:  we  may  send  the  Ring   West  over   Sea;  or   we  may
 destroy it.'(21)                                                        
   'There  is  great  peril  in  either  course,  but  more  hope  in the
 former,'  said  Erestor:   'we  must   send  the   Ring  West.   For  we
 cannot,  as  Gandalf  has  revealed,  destroy  it by  our own  skill; to
 destroy  it  we  must  send it  to the  Fire. But  of all  journeys that
 journey is the  most perilous,  and leads  straight to  the jaws  of the
 Enemy.'                                                                 
   'I  judge  otherwise,'  said  Glorfindel.  'The peril  of the  road of
 flight  is  now  the greater;  for my  heart tells  me that  Sauron will
 expect  us  to  take   the  western   way,  when   he  hears   what  has
 befallen.  Too  often  have  we  fled,  and  too  seldom   gone  forward
 against   him.   As   soon   as   news   reached   him  that   any  from
 Rivendell   were   journeying   westwards,   he   would    pursue   them

 swiftly,  and  he  would  send  before  us and  destroy the  Havens to
 prevent  us.  Let  us  hope,  indeed,  that  he  does  not  assail the
 Towers  and  the  Havens  in  any  case, so  that hereafter  the Elves
 may have no way of escape from the shadows of Middle-earth.'          
   'Then  there  are  two  courses,'  said   Erestor,  'and   both  are
 without hope. Who will read this riddle for us?'                      
   'None  here  can  do so,'  said Elrond  gravely. 'None  can foretell
 what will betide if we take  this road  or that,  whether good  or ill
 - if that is what is  meant. But  it is  not hard  to choose  which is
 now the right road. The Ring must  be sent  to the  Fire. All  else is
 but  postponement  of  our  task.  In  the  One  Ring  is  hidden much
 of  the  ancient  power  of Sauron  before it  was first  broken. Even
 though he  himself has  not yet  regained it,  that power  still lives
 [struck  out:  and  works for  him and  towards him].  As long  as the
 Ring  remains  on land  or in  the sea,  he will  not be  overcome. He
 will  have  hope; and  he will  grow, and  all men  will be  turned to
 him;  and  the  fear  lest  the  Ring  come into  his hand  again will
 weigh on all hearts, and war will never cease.                        
   'Yet it is even as Glorfindel  says: the  way of  flight is  now the
 more  perilous.  But  on  the   other  road,   with  speed   and  care
 travellers  might  go  far  unperceived. I  do not  say that  there is
 great hope in this course; but there  is in  other courses  less hope,
 and no lasting good.'                                                 
   'I  do  not  understand  all  this,'  said Boromir.  'Though Saruman
 is  a  traitor,  did  he  not  have  some   glimpse  of   wisdom?  Why
 should  not  the  Elves  and  their  friends  use  the  Great  Ring to
 defeat  the  Enemy?  And  I say  that all  men will  not turn  to him.
 The   Men  of   Minas  Tirith   are  valiant   and  they   will  never
 submit.'                                                              
   'Never is a long word, Boromir,' replied Elrond.                    
                                                                      
   From this point the conclusion of the chapter remains little changed
 from the second version, whose  pages my  father retained  here, which
 is to say that it is little changed from the original text, VI.403 ff.
 Gloin's reply to  Boromir's question  about the  Rings of  the Dwarves
 now however takes this form (and appears thus in the typescript):     
                                                                      
   'I do not know,' answered Gloin. 'It was said in secret that        
 Thror, father of Thrain, father of Thorin who fell in battle,         
 possessed one that had descended from his sires. Some said it       
 was the last. But where it now is no dwarf knows. We think            
 maybe it was taken from him, ere Gandalf found him in the:            
 dungeons of the Necromancer long ago, or maybe it was lost in         

 the mines of Moria. We guess that it was partly in hope  to find            
 the ring of Thrain that Balin went to Moria. For the messages of            
 Sauron aroused old memories. But it is long  since we  heard any            
 news: it is unlikely that he found any Ring.'                               
   'It is indeed unlikely,' said Gandalf. 'Those who say that the            
 last  ring  was  taken  from  Thror  by  the  Necromancer  speak            
 truly.'                                                                     
                                                                            
   This  passage  was  the  product  of  emendation  on  the   manuscript  of
 the  second  version  at  different  times,  and  in  the  result  a strange
 confusion was produced.                                                     
   In  the  earliest  sketch  for  'The  Council  of  Elrond'  (VI.398) Gloin
 said:  'Thrain  of old  had one  that descended  from his  sires. We  do not
 now  know  where  it  is.  We think  it was  taken from  him, ere  you found
 him  in  the  dungeons  long  ago  (or  maybe  it was  lost in  Moria).' The
 same  is  said  in  the  first  full  form  of  the chapter  (VI.403), where
 however Gloin's  words begin:  'It was  said in  secret that  Thrain (father
 of  Thror  father  of  Thorin  who fell  in battle)  possessed one  that had
 descended  from his  sires.' This  was a  contradiction of  the text  of The
 Hobbit,  where  Thror was  the father  of Thrain,  not his  son; but  it was
 repeated  in the  second version  of 'The  Council of  Elrond' (p.  136 note
 5). On this question see the Note at the end of this chapter, pp. 159 - 60.
   In  the  present  text  the  genealogy  is  corrected  (Thror  -  Thrain -
 Thorin),  but  it  now  becomes  Thror  who  was  found  in the  dungeons of
 the  Necromancer,  and  Gandalf  says  that  the ring  was taken  there from
 Thror;  whereas  in  The Hobbit  it was  explicit that  Thror was  killed by
 a  goblin  in  Moria,  and  his  son  Thrain was  captured by  the Necroman-
 cer. On the other  hand Gloin  says here  that the  Dwarves believe  that it
 was  partly  in  hope  to  find  the  ring  of  Thrain  that  Balin  went to
 Moria.(22)                                                                  
                                                                            
   In  the  original version  of the  chapter Elrond  had said  (VI.404) that
 'The Three Rings remain still', and he continued:                           
                                                                            
   'They  have  conferred  great  power  on  the  Elves,  but they  have never
   yet  availed  them  in  their  strife  with  Sauron.  For  they  came  from
   Sauron  himself,  and  can  give  no  skill  or knowledge  that he  did not
   already  possess  at  their  making.  And  to  each race  the rings  of the
   Lord  bring  such  powers  as  each  desires  and  is capable  of wielding.
   The  Elves  desired  not  strength  of domination  or riches,  but subtlety
   of  craft and  lore, and  knowledge of  the secrets  of the  world's being.
   These  things they  have gained,  yet with  sorrow. But  they will  turn to
   evil  if  Sauron  regains  the  Ruling Ring;  for then  all that  the Elves
   have  devised  or  learned with  the power  of the  rings will  become his,
   as was his purpose.'                                                      
                                                                            
         This was largely retained in the second version (p. 112), with the

 difference  that  Elrond  now  declared  that  the  Three Rings  had been
 taken over the Sea. In the fifth version he says:                        
                                                                         
   'The Three Rings remain. But of them I am not permitted to             
 speak. Certainly they cannot be  used by  us. From  them the             
 Elvenkings have derived much power, but  they have  not been             
 used for war, either good or evil. For the Elves  desire not             
 strength, or domination, or hoarded wealth, but  subtlety of             
 craft and lore...'                                                       
                                                                         
 and  continues  as  in  the  second  version. Thus,  while in  the second
 version  the  original  words 'For  they came  from Sauron  himself' were
 removed  but  'they  can  give  no  skill  or knowledge  that he  did not
 himself already possess at their making' were retained, in this  text the
 latter words are also lost. Yet Certainly they  cannot be  used by  us in
 the new  version seems  to me  to imply  that they  were made  by Sauron;
 and  the  argument  that  I  suggested  (p. 112)  in connection  with the
 second  version,  that  when  Boromir  says  that   they  were   made  by
 Sauron he is not contradicted, holds here with equal force.              
   There  were  no  further  changes  of  any  moment (23) from  the  original
 text of the chapter (VI.405 - 7, scarcely altered in the second version);
 but the chapter now ends at virtually the same  point as  in FR  ('A nice
 pickle we have landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!  '), continuing  only with
 the  brief  further  passage  that  goes  back  to  the  original version
 (VI.407):                                                                
                                                                         
   'When must I start, Master Elrond?' asked Frodo.                       
   'First you shall rest and recover full strength,' answered             
 Elrond,  guessing  his  mind.  'Rivendell is  a fair  place, and  we will
 not   send   you   away  until   you  know   it  better.   And  meanwhile
 we  will  make  plans  for  your  guidance,  and  do   what  we   can  to
 mislead the Enemy and discover what he is about.'                        
                                                                         
                                   NOTES.                                 
                                                                         
  1.  Cf.  VI.429 (the  original text  of 'The  Ring Goes  South'), where
      Gandalf  said  that  the  Mines of  Moria 'were  made by  the Dwarves
      of  Durin's  clan many  hundreds of  years ago,  when elves  dwelt in
      Hollin'.                                                            
  2.  The first  occurrence of  the name  Erebor, which  in the  narrative of
      LR  is  not found  before Book  V, Chapter  IX of  The Return  of the
      King.                                                               
  3.  In the original edition  of The  Hobbit the  goblin who  slew Thror
      in Moria was not  named, as  he is  not in  the present  passage ('he
      was slain by an Orc'). In  the third  edition of  1966 the  name Azog
      was  introduced  (from  LR) in  Chapter I  as that  of the  slayer of

     Thror,  and  a  footnote  was  added  in  Chapter XVII  stating that
     Bolg, leader of the Goblins in the  Battle of  Five Armies,  was the
     son of Azog.                                                       
  4. The  new  passage  was  written   in  ink   over  pencil,   but  the
     underlying  text,  which  has  been  deciphered  by  Taum  Santoski,
     was  little  changed.  The  name  Anduin  was  not  present,  though
     Ond  was  already  Ondor  (see notes  6 and  7); and  the translated
     name  of  Elendil's  city  Tarkilmar   was  both   Westermanton  and
     Aldemanton  (Alde  probably  signifying  'old',  sc. 'the  "town" of
     the ancient Men (of the West)').                                   
  5. This  is  the  first occurrence  of the  name Anduin,  as originally
     written, in the narrative texts of LR - as they are  here presented,
     but it  is not  in the  over-written pencilled  text of  the passage
     (note 4).                                                          
  6. This is the first occurrence of Ondor for Ond, and is so  written in
     both pencilled text and ink overlay (note 4).                      
  7. It is curious that here, in a passage of  new manuscript,  and again
     a few  lines below,  the form  should have  been first  written Ond,
     whereas on p. 144 it is Ondor (note 6).                            
  8. The verse remains in the latest form that has been given (p. 78).
  9. Aragorn had said in the  fourth version  (p. 128)  that he  had been
     in Minas Tirith, but the word 'unknown' here  is possibly  the first
     hint of the story  of Aragorn's  service in  Minas Tirith  under the
     name  Thorongil  (LR  Appendix  A  (I,  IV, The  Stewards), Appendix
     B (years 2957 - 80)).                                              
 10. Fornobel is the name on the First Map (Map II, pp. 304 - 5).       
 11. Written  above  'we'  and   probably  at   once,  but   struck  out:
     'Saruman our chief'.                                               
 12. It is not clear why  Galdor/Legolas should  have contributed  to the
     story of Gollum at this point, but  cf. 'Ancient  History' (VI.320),
     where  Gandalf says  'it was  friends of  mine who  actually tracked
     him down, with the help of the Wood-elves'.                       
 13. Various  minor  changes  (mostly  expansions)   were  made   to  the
     manuscript  in  Saruman's  speech,  and  since  these appear  in the
     typescript (p. 141) I have included them in the text. -  In speaking
     of  'more time'  Saruman was  referring to  possession of  the Ring.
     In  a  later change  to the  typescript he  adds after  'more time':
     'longer [> lasting] life'.                                         
 14. Afterwards  Halbarad  became  the  name  of  the  Ranger   who  bore
     Aragorn's standard and died in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields.
 15. That  Gandalf  should  have  taken  only  ten  days  from Weathertop
     to  Rivendell does  not agree  with the  dating. He  left Weathertop
     early on 4 October, and if  he reached  Rivendell three  days before
     Frodo  he  arrived on  the 17th,  i.e. just  under a  fortnight from
     Weathertop, not ten days. This is in fact what he  says in  the same
     passage  in  FR  (p.  278): 'It  took me  nearly fourteen  days from

       Weathertop  ...  I  came  to  Rivendell  only  three days  before the
       Ring.'  But this  does not  agree with  LR Appendix  B (nor  with the
       Time-scheme  D on  p. 14),  where he  arrived on  the 18th,  only two
       days before Frodo.                                                   
  16.  Struck out here: 'Sauron  it would  seem has  gained an  ally already
       faithless  to  himself;  yet  I  do not  doubt that  he knows  it and
       laughs'. This is  very similar  to the  sentence doubtfully  given to
       Gandalf on p. 151.                                                   
  17.  In  a  rejected  draft  of this  passage Elrond  goes on:  'There are
       others   elsewhere,  wherever   the  men   of  Numenor   sought  dark
       knowledge  under  the  shadow  of  death  in  Middle-earth,  and they
       are akin to the' [Ringwraiths]. Cf. VI.118 - 20, 401.                
  18.  See p. 125.  The reading  given is  the product  of much  changing on
       the  manuscript.  At  first my  father wrote:  Yare's for  the Elves,
       Erion  is  for  Gnomes,  Forn   for  the   dwarves;  and   names  of
       Bombadil  among  Men,  all  struck  out,  were  Oreald,   Orold  (Old
       English: 'very old'),  and Frumbarn  (Old English:  'first-born'). In
       FR (p. 278) Bombadil was called Orald 'by Northern Men'.             
  19.  This  passage  in  which  Gandalf  contrasts  his nature  with Bomba-
       dil's entered in the second  version, p.  111, replacing  the earlier
       story  that  Gandalf  had  visited him  as a  matter of  course. Much
       further  back,  however,  in  an  isolated  draft  for  a  passage in
       Gandalf's  conversation  with  Bingo  at   Rivendell  on   his  first
       waking  (VI.213  -  14), he  spoke of  Bombadil in  a way  not unlike
       his  words  here  (though  his  conclusion  then  was  entirely  dif-
       ferent):                                                             
         We  have  never had  much to  do with  one another  up till  now. I
       don't  think  he  quite  approves  of  me  somehow.  He belongs  to a
       much  older  generation,  and  my   ways  are   not  his.   He  keeps
       himself  to  himself  and  does not  believe in  travel. But  I fancy
       somehow that we shall all  need his  help in  the end  - and  that he
       may have to take an interest in things outside his own country.      
  20.  Gandalf's  account  of  Bombadil's  power  and  its  limitations goes
       back almost word for word  to the  original text  of 'The  Council of
       Elrond', VI.402.                                                     
  21.  This speech was first given to  Erestor, as  in the  original version
       (VI.402).  When  my  father  gave  it   to  Glorfindel   instead,  he
       followed it at first with the remainder of Erestor's original speech,
       in which  he defined  the opposing  perils, and  ended 'Who  can read
       this riddle for us?' This speech was struck out  as soon  as written,
       and in its place Erestor  was given  the speech  that follows  in the
       text ('There is great peril in either course...'), in which he argues
       that  the  Ring  must  be  sent to  the Grey  Havens and  thence over
       the Sea.                                                             
  22.  The  following  seems  a  plausible   explanation  of   this  strange
       situation.  My  father  added  Gloin's surmise  that Balin  had hoped

  to  find  the  ring  of  Thrain  in  Moria  to  the  existing  (second)
  version  while  the  statement  'It  was  said  in secret  that Thrain,
  father of Thror, father of Thorin  who fell  in battle,  possessed one'
  still  stood.  Subsequently he  added in  Gandalf's assurance  that the
  last  ring  had  indeed  been  taken  from  the  captive  dwarf  in the
  dungeons  of  the  Necromancer.  Now  since  according  to   the  story
  in  The  Hobbit  it  was  the  son   (Thorin's  father)   whom  Gandalf
  found  in  the  dungeon,  and  the  son  had  received  the map  of the
  Lonely   Mountain   from   his   father   (Thorin's   grandfather),  he
  made  it  Thror  who  was  captured  by  the  Necromancer  -   for  the
  erroneous  genealogy  Thrain  -  Thror  -  Thorin  was  still  present.
  Finally he realised the error in  relation to  The Hobbit,  and roughly
  changed  Gloin's  opening  words  to  'It  was  said  in   secret  that
  Thror,  father  of  Thrain...  possessed  one',  without  observing the
  effect on  the rest  of the  passage; and  in this  form it  was handed
  over to the typist.                                                   
    In  Gloin's  story  at  the  beginning  of the  chapter, p.  142, the
  correct genealogy is present.                                         
 23.  A  correction  to  the  manuscript  which  is  also  found  in  the
  typescript  as  typed  altered  Elrond's  reply  to  Boromir's question
  'What  then  would  happen,  if  the   Ruling  Ring   were  destroyed?'
  Instead  of  'The  Elves  would not  lose what  they have  already won;
  but  the  Three  Rings  would  lose  all  power thereafter'  his answer
  becomes:  'The  Elves  would  not  lose   that  knowledge   which  they
  have  already  won;  but  the   Three  Rings   would  lose   all  power
  thereafter, and many fair things would fade.'                         
                                                                       
                        Note on Thror and Thrain.                       
                                                                       
 There is no question that the genealogy as first devised in  The Hobbit
 was  Thorin  Oakenshield  -  Thrain -  Thror (always  without accents).
 At one point, however, Thror and  Thrain were  reversed in  my father's
 typescript, and this survived into the first  proof. Taum  Santoski and
 John  Rateliff  have  minutely  examined the  proofs and  shown conclu-
 sively that instead of correcting this one error  my father  decided to
 extend  Thorin  -  Thror  -  Thrain  right through  the book;  but that
 having done so he then  changed all  the occurrences  back to  Thorin -
 Thrain - Thror. It is hard to believe  that this  extraordinary concern
 was  unconnected  with  the  words  on  'Thror's  Map'  in  The Hobbit:
 'Here of old was Thrain King under the Mountain';  but the  solution of
 this conundrum, if it can be found, belongs with the textual history of
 The Hobbit, and I shall not pursue it further. I mention it, of course,
 because in early manuscripts  of The  Lord of  the Rings  the genealogy
 reverts to Thorin - Thror - Thrain despite the publication of  Thorin -
 Thrain - Thror in The Hobbit. The only solution I can propose  for this
 is  that having,  for whatever  reason, hesitated  so long  between the

   alternatives, when my father was drafting 'The Council of Elrond'   ]
   Thorin - Thror - Thrain seemed as 'right' as Thorin - Thrain - Thror,
   and he did not check it with The Hobbit.
     Years later, my father remarked in the prefatory note that appeared
   in the second (1951) edition:
     A final note may be added, on a point raised by several students of
   the lore of the period. On Thror's Map is written Here of old was
        Thrain King under the Mountain; yet Thrain was the son of Thror,
       the last King under the Mountain before the coming of the dragon.
          The Map, however, is not in error. Names are often repeated in
    dynasties, and the genealogies show that a distant ancestor of Thror
      was referred to, Thrain I, a fugitive from Moria, who first disco-
         vered the Lonely Mountain, Erebor, and ruled there for a while,
       before his people moved on to the remoter mountains of the North.
 In the third edition of 1966 the opening of Thorin's story in Chapter I
 was changed to introduce Thrain I into the text. Until then it had read:
         'Long ago in my grandfather's time some dwarves were driven out
     of the far North, and came with all their wealth and their tools to
       this Mountain on the map. There they mined and they tunnelled and
    they made huge halls and great workshops...'
     The present text of The Hobbit reads here:
      'Long ago in my grandfather Thror's time our family was driven out
   of the far North, and came back with all their wealth and their tools
           to this Mountain on the map. It had been discovered by my far
         ancestor, Thrain the Old, but now they mined and they tunnelled
     and they made huger halls and greater workshops...'
        At the same time, in the next sentence, 'my grandfather was King
       under the Mountain' was changed to 'my grandfather was King under
     the Mountain again.'
        The history of Thrain the First, fugitive from Moria, first King
      under the Mountain, and discoverer of the Arkenstone, was given in
    The Lord of the Rings, Appendix A (III), Durin's Folk; and doubtless
    the prefatory note in the 1951 edition and the passage in Appendix A
    were closely related. But this was the product of development in the
     history of the Dwarves that came in with The Lord of the Rings (and
     indeed the need to explain the words on the map 'Here of old was
     Thrain King under the Mountain' evidently played a part in that
     development). When The Hobbit was first published it was Thrain son
   of Thror - the only Thrain at that time conceived of - who discovered
     the Arkenstone.
