                                 VIII.                              
                           THE RING GOES SOUTH.                        
                                                                      
 The intractable problems that had beset The Lord of the Rings  thus far
 were now at last resolved. The identity of Trotter had  been decisively
 established,  and with  the work  done in  successive versions  of 'The
 Council  of  Elrond'  his  place  and  significance  in the  history of
 Middle-earth was already made firm - meagre  though that  history still
 was by comparison  with the  great structure  that would  afterwards be
 raised  on  these  foundations.  The  hobbits  were  equally  secure in
 number  and in  name, and  the only  Bolger who  ever roved  far afield
 would rove no more. Bombadil is to play no further part in  the history
 of  the  Ring.  Most  intractable  of  all,  the  question of  what had
 happened  to  Gandalf  was  now  conclusively  answered; and  with that
 answer had  arisen (as  it would  turn out)  a new  focal point  in the
 history of the War of the Ring: the Treason of Isengard.              
  There still remained  of older  narrative writing  the journey  of the
 Company  of  the  Ring  from   Rivendell  to   the  Red   Pass  beneath
 Caradras,  and the  passage of  the Mines  of Moria  as far  as Balin's
 tomb.  One  major  question  remained,  however,  and a  final decision
 must  imperatively  be  made:  who  were  the  members  of  the Company
 to be?                                                                
  Notes  and  drafts  written  on the  'August 1940'  examination script
 show my father  pondering this  further. One  manuscript page  reads as
 follows:                                                              
                                                                      
   Chapter XV. Cut out converse in garden.(1)                          
   Begin by saying hobbits were displeased with Sam.                   
   Tell them of the scouts going out.                                  
  Elrond then  says union  of forces  is impossible.  We cannot  send or
   summon  great  force  to  aid  Frodo.  We must  send out  messages to
   all free folk to resist as  long as  possible, and  that a  new hope,
   though  faint,  is born.  But with  Frodo must  go helpers,  and they
   should represent  all the  Free Folk.  Nine should  be the  number to
   set against the Nine  Evil Servants.  But we  should support  the war
   in Minas Tirith.                                                    
   Galdor Legolas (2)                                                  
                                                                      
  Hobbits.  Frodo.                        1                            
            Sam (promised)                2                            
  Wizard.   Gandalf                       3                            

                                 
                                                                           
   Elf.      Legolas                         4                               
   Half-elf. Erestor                         5                               
      The road should go to Minas Tirith, therefore so far at least         
   should go:                                                               
   Men.     Aragorn                       6                               
            Boromir                       7                               
   Dwarf.   Gimli son of Gloin            8                                            
             Merry, Pippin. They insist on going. [Struck out:              
      Pippin only if Erestor does not go.] Elrond says there may be .       
      work in the Shire, and it may prove ill if they all go.               
      Shall Pippin return to the Shire?                                     
      Then come preparations, and the scene with Bilbo and Frodo and        
      giving of Sting &c.                                                  
                                                                           
 Here the number of Nine members of the Company, expressly                  
 corresponding to the Nine Ringwraiths, is reached;(3) but even so there       
 remains a doubt as to its composition where the hobbits are concerned      
 (see p. 115), and my father's lingering feeling that one at least should
 return to the Shire at this stage was still a, factor, especially since the
 inclusion of Erestor 'Half-elf'(4) took the number to eight. But this was 
 the last moment of indecision. A short draft, written hastily in ink on
 the same paper, introduces t he final complement of the Company of     
 the Ring. On it my father pencilled: 'Sketch of reduction of the           
 choosing of the Company'.(5)                                               
                                                                           
   In the end after the matter had been much debated by Elrond and         
   Gandalf it was decided that the Nine of the Company of the Ring          
   should be the four hobbits, aided by Gandalf; and that Legolas           
   should represent the Elves, and Gimli son of Gloin the Dwarves. On       
   behalf of Men Aragorn should go, and Boromir. For they were              
   going to Minas Tirith, and Aragorn counselled that the Company           
   should go that way, and even maybe go first to that city. Elrond was     
   reluctant to send Merry and Pippin, but Gandalf [?supported].            
                                                                           
   My  father  now  proceeded  to  a  new  text  of  'The Ring  Goes South';
 and of  preliminary work  nothing survives,  if any  existed, apart  from a
 few  passages  in rough  drafting from  the beginning  of the  chapter. The
 new  version  is  a  good  clear  manuscript  in  ink,  using  in  part the
 'August  1940'  script  that  had  been  used  for  the  drafting  of major
 developments  in  'The  Council   of  Elrond'.   The  story   now  advanced
 confidently, and for long  stretches scarcely  differs from  that in  FR in
 the actual wording of  the narrative  and the  speeches of  the characters.
 There  are  a  number  of  later  emendations,  a  good  many of  which can
 be shown to come from a  little later  in the  same period  of composition.
 As  written,  the  chapter  had  no  title,  various   possibilities  being
 pencilled in afterwards: although in  the original  text, when  the chapter
 was  continuous  with  'The  Council  of Elrond',  there was  a sub-heading

 'The  Ring  Goes  South'  (VI.415),  my  father   now  tried   also  'The
 Company of the Ring Departs' and 'The Ring Sets Out'.                    
   Since  the  previous  chapter  now  ended  where  it  ends  in  FR,  at
 the conclusion  of  the  Council,  the  ensuing  conversation  among  the
 hobbits,  interrupted  by  Gandalf, was  moved to  the beginning  of 'The
 Ring  Goes  South'.  My  father  now took  up his  direction to  'cut out
 converse in garden' (see note 1), and  the chapter  begins exactly  as in
 FR,  with the  hobbits talking  in Bilbo's  room later  on the  same day,
 and  Gandalf  looking  in  through  the  window.  The   new  conversation
 almost reaches  the form  in FR  (pp. 285  - 7),  and only  the following
 differences  need  be  mentioned.  Gandalf  speaks   of  'the   Elves  of
 Mirkwood',  not  of  'Thranduil's  folk  in  Mirkwood',  and he  does not
 say  that  'Aragorn  has  gone  with  Elrond's  sons'  (who  had  not yet
 emerged);  and  Bilbo's  remarks  about  the  season  of  their departure
 were first written:                                                      
                                                                         
   '... you can't wait now till  Spring, and  you can't  go till  the scouts
   come  back.  So  off  you  go  nice  and  comfortable just  when winter's
   beginning to bite.'                                                    
    'Quite in the Gandalf manner,' said Pippin.                           
    'Exactly,' said Gandalf.                                              
                                                                         
 This was replaced at once by Bilbo's verse (When  winter first  begins to
 bite) that he speaks here in FR.  Lastly, Gandalf  says: 'In  this matter
 Elrond  will  have  [the  decision  >]  much  to  say,  and  your  friend
 Trotter, Aragorn the tarkil, too' (FR: 'and your friend the Strider').
   While still writing  the opening  of the  chapter, my  father hesitated
 about  the  structure. One  possibility seems  to have  been to  keep the
 new conversation  in Bilbo's  room but  to put  it back  into the  end of
 'The Council  of Elrond',  ending at  Sam's remark  'And where  will they
 live? That's what I often wonder'; another, to  cut out  the conversation
 among  the  hobbits,  and  Gandalf's intervention  at the  window, almost
 in its entirety. He went so far as to provide a brief substitute passage;
 but decided against it.(6)                                               
   The  chronology  in  FR,   according  to   which  the   Company  stayed
 more  than  two  months in  Rivendell and  left on  25 December,  had not
 yet entered.  In the  second version  of 'The  Council of  Elrond', which
 continued  for  some  distance  into  the  narrative  of  'The  Ring Goes
 South', 'the hobbits had been some three  weeks in  the house  of Elrond,
 and  November  was  passing'  when  the  scouts began  to return;  and at
 the  Choosing  of  the  Company  the  date of  departure was  settled for
 'the following Thursday, November the seventeenth' (pp. 113, 115).(7)    
 In  the  new  text  the  same was  said ('some  three weeks  ... November
 was passing'), but this was changed,  probably at  once, to  'The hobbits
 had  been  nearly  a  month  in  the  house of  Elrond, and  November was
 half over,  when the  scouts began  to return';  and subsequently  (as in
 FR  p. 290)  Elrond says:  'In seven  days the  Company must  depart.' No

  actual  date  for  the  leaving  of  Rivendell  is  now   mentioned,  but
  it  had  been  postponed  to  nearer the  end of  the month  (actually to
  24 November, see p. 169).                                                
    The  account  of  the  journeys  of  the  scouts  moves  on   from  the
  previous versions (VI.415 - 16 and VII.113 - 14), and largely attains the
  text in FR, apart from there being, as at the  beginning of  the chapter,
  no  mention  of  Aragorn's  having  left  Rivendell, nor  of the  sons of
  Elrond.  Those  scouts  who  went  north  had  gone 'beyond  the Hoarwell
  into  the  Entishlands',  and  those  who  went  west  had  'searched the
  lands  far down  the Greyflood,  as far  as Tharbad  where the  old North
  Road crossed the river by the ruined town'. This  is where  Tharbad first
  appears.  Those  who  had  climbed  the  pass  at  the  sources   of  the
  Gladden  had  reached  the  old home  of Radagast  at Rhosgobel': this is
  where  Rhosqobel  is  first  named,  and  in the  margin my  father wrote
  'Brown hay'.(10)                                                         
    These  last  had  returned  up the Redway (11) and  over  the  high pass
  that was called the Dimrill Stair'. The name 'Dimrill Stair' for the pass
  beneath  Caradras  has  appeared  in  later  emendations to  the original
  version of 'The Ring Goes South' (VI.433 - 4,  notes 14  and 21).  In the
  present  passage  the  name  was not  emended at  any stage;  but further
  on in the chapter, where in this text Gandalf says 'If we climb  the pass
  that is called the Dimrill Stair  ... we  shall come  down into  the deep
  dale  of  the  Dwarves', my  father (much  later) emended  the manuscript
  to the reading of FR (p. 296): 'If we climb the pass  that is  called the
  Redhorn  Gate  ...  we  shall  come down  by the  Dimrill Stair  into the
  deep  vale  of  the  Dwarves' (and  thus Robert  Foster, in  The Complete
  Guide  to  Middle-earth,  defines  Dimrill  Stair  as 'Path  leading from
  Azanulbizar to the Redhorn Pass'). The name of the  pass (called  in this
  text the 'Dimrill Pass' as well as the 'Dimrill Stair') was  changed also
  at other occurrences in this chapter, but at this place my  father having
  missed it in the manuscript it was retained in  the typescript  that soon
  followed (note 6), and so survived into FR, p. 287:  'over the  high pass
  that was called the Dimrill Stair' - an error that was never picked up.
                                                                          
    The  Choosing  of  the  Company  is  found  in  this manuscript  in two
  alternative versions. Though the essential content is  the same  in both,
  and  both  end with  the inclusion  of Merry  and Pippin  after Gandalf's
  advocacy, the one written first is rather nearer to the preceding version
  (pp. 113 - 15): the chief difference between them being that in the first
  the formation of the Company is seen as  it takes  place, whereas  in the
  second (which is almost identical to  the form  in FR)  the deliberations
  have  been largely  completed and  Elrond announces  the decision  to the
  hobbits.(12)                                                             
    There  are several  differences worth  noticing in  the first  of these
  versions.  After  Gandalf's remark  that his  fate 'seems  much entangled
  with hobbits'  Elrond says:  'You will  be needed  many times  before the
  journey's  end,  Gandalf;  but  maybe when  there is  most need  you will

     not be there. This is your greatest peril, and I shall not have peace till I
     see  you  again.'  The  loss  of  Gandalf  was  of course  foreseen (VI.443,
     462).  Aragorn, after  saying to  Frodo that  since he  himself is  going to
     Minas  Tirith  their  roads  lie  together  for  many  hundreds  of leagues,
     adds: 'Indeed it is my counsel that you should go first  to that  city'. And
     after  saying  that  for  the  two unfilled  places needed  to make  nine he
     may  be  able  to  find  some  'of  my  own  kindred  and  household' Elrond
     continues  (but  the  passage  was at  once deleted):  'The elf-lords  I may
     not send,  for though  their power  is great  it is  not great  enough. They
     cannot  walk  unhidden  from  wrath  and  spirit  of evil,  and news  of the
     Company would reach Mordor by day or night.'                                
       In  these  passages,  and  throughout   the  rest   of  the   chapter  (in
     intention),   Aragorn   was   again   changed  to   Elfstone,  and   son  of
     Kelegorn  to  son  of  Elfhelm (see  pp.  277  - 8),  as also  was Trotter,
     except where he is directly addressed thus by one of the hobbits.           
       The  reforging  of  the  Sword  of  Elendil now  enters, and  the descrip-
     tion of it is at once precisely as in FR (p. 290), with the 'device of seven
     stars  set  between  the crescent  moon and  the rayed  sun', save  that the
     reforged  sword  is  given  no  name.  This  was  added  in  somewhat later:
     'And  Elfstone  gave  it  a new  name and  called it  Branding' (see  p. 274
     and note 19).                                                               
       For  the  next  part  of  the  chapter  (Bilbo and  Frodo during  the last
     days  at  Rivendell)  my  father  simply  took  over  the  actual manuscript
     pages  of  the  second  version  of  'The  Council  of  Elrond',  from  'The
     weather  had  grown  cold...  '  (p.  115); this  passage was  already close
     to the form in  FR.(13) After  I should  like to  write the  second book,  if I
     am  spared'  (which  is  where  the  second  version  of  'The   Council  of
     Elrond'  ended)   my  father   wrote  on   the  manuscript   'Verses?',  but
     Bilbo's  song  I  sit  beside  the  fire  and  think  is  not found  in this
     manuscript.  The  original  workings  for  the  song  are  extant,  however,
     and certainly belong to this time.(14)                                      
       The  day  of   departure  was   'a  cold   grey  day   near  the   end  of
     November'  (see  p.  164).  At  first  there  were  two  ponies,  as  in the
     original  version  (VI.416),  but  'Bill'  bought   in  Bree,   and  greatly
     invigorated  by  his  stay  in  Rivendell,  was  substituted  as  my  father
     wrote.(15) The  departure  was  at  this  time   much  more   briefly  treated
     than it is in  FR: there  is no  blowing of  Boromir's war-horn,  no account
     of  the  arms  borne  by  each  member  of  the Company  or of  the clothing
     provided  by  Elrond,  and  no  mention  of   Sam's  checking   through  his
     belongings  -  so that  the important  minor element  of his  discovery that
     he has no rope is absent (cf. pp. 183, 280).                                
                                                                                
       The  story  of  the journey  from Rivendell  to Hollin  is now  very close
     to  FR,  but  there  are  differences in  geography and  geographical names,
     which  were  evolving  as  the  new  version  progressed.  The  journey  had
     still  taken  'some  ten  days'  to  the  point  where  the  weather changed
     (VI.418),  whereas  in  FR  it  took  a  fortnight; and  there was  only one

  great peak, not three.  An Elvish  name for  Hollin: 'Nan-eregdos  in the
  elfspeech  was  added,  apparently  at  the  time  of writing.(16) Gandalf
  estimates that they have come 'fifty leagues as  the crow  flies' ('five-
  and-forty leagues as the crow flies' FR, 'eighty leagues' in the original
  version). And where in the first version, in reply to the  observation of
  Faramond  (Pippin)  that  since the  mountains are  ahead they  must have
  turned east, Gandalf said 'No, it is the mountains that have  turned', he
  now replies, 'No, it is the mountains that have  bent west'  (FR: 'Beyond
  those  peaks  the  range  bends  round  south-west').  On  this difficult
  question of geography see VI.440 - 1.                                    
    Gimli's  speech  about  the  Mountains  is  present,  almost  word  for
  word as in FR,  except that  the three  peaks not  yet being  devised his
  words  'we  have  wrought  the  image  of   those  mountains   into  many
  works of  metal and  of stone,  and into  many songs  and tales'  seem to
  have a more  general bearing.  But he  continues (as  in FR):  'Only once
  before have I seen them from afar  in waking  life, but  I know  them and
  their  names,  for  under  them  lies  Khazad-dum, the  Dwarrowdelf, that
  is now called the Black [Gulf >] Pit,(17) Moria in  the elvish  tongue', and
  it seems  that he  is here  speaking of  certain notable  and outstanding
  peaks, distinctive in  the chain  of the  Misty Mountains,  beneath which
  lay Moria. (The  three great  Mountains of  Moria were  in any  case just
  about to enter, in Gimli's next speech.) Here he says, as in  FR, 'Yonder
  stands Barazinbar, the Redhorn, cruel  Caradhras', 'cruel'  being altered
  at the moment of writing from 'the windy', and that  from 'the  tall', as
  also  was  Caradhras  from  Caradras.(18) And  he  speaks  also  of Azanul-
  bizar, the Dimrill-dale that elves call Nanduhirion .(19)                
    Gandalf's  reply,  and  Gimli's  further  words  about  the Mirrormere,
  are a  difficult complex  of rapid  changes in  the manuscript,  when new
  elements are  seen at  the moment  of emergence.  With some  slight doubt
  as  to  the precise  sequence of  correction, the  passage seems  to have
  developed thus:                                                          
                                                                          
    'It  is  for Dimrill-dale  that we  are making,'  said Gandalf.  'If we
  climb  the  pass  that is  called the  Dimrill Stair  under the  red side
  of  Caradhras,  we  shall   come  down   into  the   deep  dale   of  the
  Dwarves.(20) There  the  River   [Redway  rises   in  the   black  wat(er)
  Morthond  Blackroot   >]  Morthond   the  cold   rises  in   the  Mirror-
  mere.'                                                                   
    'Dark  is  the  water  of  Kheledzaram,'   said  Gimli,   'and  mirrors
  only  the  far  sky  and  three  white peaks;  and cold  is the  water of
  Buzundush.   My  heart   trembles  at   the  thought   that  I   may  see
  them soon.'                                                              
                                                                          
  Obviously, it was  as my  father began  to write  the words  he intended:
  'the River Redway rises in the black wat[er of  the Mirrormere]'  that he
  changed  the  name of  the river  to Morthond,  'Blackroot'; and  I think

 that  it  was  here  also  that  the  three  peaks  above  Moria entered,
 mirrored  in  the  water.(21) He  then  wrote  a  new  passage,  no doubt
 intended  to  supersede  part  of  that  just given,  but struck  it out,
 probably immediately:                                                    
                                                                         
 There  lies Kheledzaram,  the Mirror-mere,  deep and  dark, in           
 which can be seen only the far sky and three white peaks. From           
 it issues Buzundush,  the Blackroot  River, Morthond  cold and           
 swift. My heart trembles at the  thought that  I may  see them           
 soon.'(22)                                                               
                                                                         
 Gandalf replying said: '... we at least  cannot stay  in that  valley. We
 must  go  down  the  Morthond  into  the  woods  of  Lothlorien...'  (FR:
 'into  the  secret  woods').  This  is  where,  as  it  seems,  the  name
 Lothlorien  first  appears.  And  when  Merry  asked:  'Yes,   and  where
 then?' the wizard answered: 'To the end of the journey -  in the  end. It
 may  be  that  you  will  pass  through  Fangorn,  which  some  call  the
 Topless Forest. But we  must not  look too  far ahead....'  The reference
 to Fangorn was deleted.                                                  
   Several  versions  of  Legolas'  words  about  the  forgotten  Elves of
 Hollin were written before the final form was achieved: the  first reads:
                                                                         
   'That  is true,'  said Legolas.  'But the  Elves of  this land  were of
 a strange  race, and  the spirit  that dwells  here is  alien to  me, who
 am   of   the  woodland   folk.  Here   dwelt  Noldor,   the  Elven-wise,
 and  all  the  stones  about  cry  to  me  with  many voices:  they built
 high  towers  to  heaven,  and  delved  deep  to  earth,  and   they  are
 gone. They are gone. They sought the Havens long ago.'                   
                                                                         
   The story of the great silence over all the land of Hollin, the flights
 of black crows,  Pippin's disappointment  at the  news and  Sam's failure
 to  comprehend  the  geography,  the  mysterious  passage   of  something
 against the stars, and the sight of  Caradhras close  before them  on the
 third  morning  from  Hollin,  all this  is told  in words  that remained
 virtually unchanged in FR, save for a few details. Trotter says  that the
 crows are 'not natives to this place', but  does not  add that  'they are
 crebain  out  of  Fangorn  and  Dunland';  and after  saying that  he has
 glimpsed  many  hawks flying  high up,  he says  'That would  account for
 the silence of all  the birds',  this being  struck out  immediately (see
 VI.420  and   note  17).   Sam  calls   Caradhras  'this   Ruddyhorn,  or
 whatever its name is', as he did  in the  original version  (VI.421), but
 Ruddyhorn  was  then to  be its  accepted English  name (VI.419  and note
 11).                                                                     
   As  the  Company  walked  on  the  ancient  road  from  Hollin  to  the
 Pass, the moon rose over the mountains almost at  the full'; as  in the
 original version it is said that the light was  unwelcome to  Trotter and

 Gandalf,  and 'they  were relieved  when at  last late  in the  night the
 moon set and  left them  to the  stars'. In  the original  text it  was a
 crescent moon (VI.421 and note 19), and 'it stayed  but a  little while';
 in  FR the  moon was  full, and  still low  in the  western sky  when the
 shadow passed across the stars.                                         
   In the  original version  it was  Trotter who  favoured the  passage of
 Moria,  Gandalf  who  favoured  the   Pass,  and   what  they   said  was
 coloured  by  their  opinions.  This was  still the  case when  my father
 came to the new version, although what is said is virtually what  is said
 in FR (p. 300):                                                         
                                                                        
   'Winter   is  behind,'   [Gandalf]  said   quietly  to   Trotter.  'The
 peaks  away  north  are  whiter  than  they  were;  snow  is   lying  far
 down their shoulders.'                                                  
   'And  tonight,'  said  Trotter,  'we  shall  be  on  our  way  high  up
 the  Dimrill  Stair.  If  we  are  not  seen by  watchers on  that narrow
 path,   and   waylaid   by   some   evil,  the   weather  may   prove  as
 deadly an enemy as any. What do you think of our course now?'           
   Frodo overheard these words [@c. as in FR]                            
   'I  think  no  good  of  any  part  of  our  course  from  beginning to
 end,   as   you  know   well,  Aragorn',   answered  Gandalf,   his  tone
 sharpened  by  anxiety.  'But  we  must  go  on.  It   is  no   good  our
 delaying  the  passage  of  the  mountains.   Further  south   there  are
 no  passes, till  one comes  to the  Gap of  Rohan. I  do not  trust that
 way,  since  the  fall  of  Saruman.  Who  knows   which  side   now  the
 marshals of the Horse-lords serve?'                                     
   'Who  knows  indeed!'  said  Trotter.  'But   there  is   another  way,
 and  not  by  the  pass  beneath  Caradhras:  the  dark  and  secret  way
 that we have spoken of.'                                                
   'And  I  will  not  speak  of  it again.  Not yet.  Say nothing  to the
 others,  I  beg.  Nor  you,  Frodo,'   said  Gandalf,   turning  suddenly
 towards  him.  'You  have  listened  to  our  words,  as  is  your  right
 as  Ring-bearer.  But I  will not  say any  more until  it is  plain that
 there is no other course.'                                              
   'We must decide before we go further,' said Gandalf.                  
   'Then  let  us  weigh  the  matter  in  our  minds,  while  the  others
 rest and sleep,' answered Trotter.                                      
                                                                        
 Since the speakers of the last  two speeches  are out  of order  with the
 preceding conversation, it was at  this point  that my  father 'realised'
 that it  was Trotter  and not  Gandalf who  especially feared  Moria, and
 at once changed the text of the passage accordingly.                    
   Gandalf  s  words  to the  Company at  the end  of his  discussion with
 Trotter, and the  whole account  of the  snowstorm, are  very much  as in

  FR (pp. 300 - 2),  though in  the latter  part of  this chapter  the actual
  wording  underwent  more  development  later  to  reach  the  FR  text than
  had been the case till  now. Boromir  says that  he was  born in  the Black
  Mountains  (see  VI.436,  note  31); and  the reference  to Bilbo  alone of
  hobbits  remembering  the  Fell  Winter  of  the   year  1311   is  absent.
  Another  use  of  names  from the  legends of  the Elder  Days, immediately
  rejected,  appears  in  Boromir's  words  about  the  snowstorm:  'I wonder
  if the  Enemy has  anything to  do with  it? They  say in  my land  that he
  can  govern  the  storms  in  [struck  out:  Mountains of  Shadow Daedeloth
  Delduath] the  Mountains   of  Shadow   that  lie   on  the   confines  of
  Mordor.'(23)                                                                   
    In  Frodo's  dream, as  he fell  into a  snow-sleep, Bilbo's  voice said:
  Snowstorm  on  December  the  ninth  (in  the  original  version  2  Decem-
  ber,  VI.424;  in  FR  12 January).  The journey  from Rivendell  to Hollin
  had  taken  'some  ten  days'  (p.  165); and  a chronological  scheme that
  seems clearly to derive from this time and to fit this narrative  gives the
  date  of  departure  from  Rivendell   as  the   evening  of   Thursday  24
  November.  According  to  this  scheme  the   Company  reached   Hollin  on
  6  December,  the  journey  from  Rivendell having  thus taken  eleven days
  (and twelve nights), and 'Snow on Caradras' is dated 9 December.           
    The liquor that  Gandalf gives  to the  Company from  his flask  is still
  called  'one  of Elrond's  cordials', as  in VI.424,  and the  name miruvor
  does  not appear.  Gandalf, as  the flame  sprang up  from the  wood, said:
  'I have written Gandalf is here in signs  that even  the blind  rocks could
  read', but he does not say, as he thrusts his staff  into the  faggot, naur
  an edraith ammen!(24)                                                      
    The  account  of  the  descent remains  distinctively different  from the
  story in FR, and closer to the original (VI.426 - 7), despite the fact that
  Trotter was there still a hobbit, and Gimli and Legolas not present.       
                                                                            
    'The  sooner  we  make   a  move   and  get   down  again   the  better,'
  said Gandalf. 'There is more snow still to come up here.'                  
    Much  as  they  all  desired  to  get  down  again,  it  was  easier said
  than  done.  Beyond   their  refuge   the  snow   was  already   some  feet
  deep,  and  in  places  was  piled  into  great  wind-drifts;  and  it  was
  wet  and  soft.  Gandalf  could  only  get   forward  with   great  labour,
  and  had  only   gone  a   few  yards   on  the   downward  path   when  he
  was   floundering   in   snow   above  his   waist.  Their   plight  looked
  desperate.                                                                 
    Boromir  was  the  tallest  of   the  Company,   being  above   six  feet
  and  very  broad-shouldered  as   well.  'I   am  going   on  down,   if  I
  can,'  he  said.  'As  far  as I  can make  out our  course of  last night,
  the   path  turns   right  round   that  shoulder   of  rock   down  there.
  And  if  I  remember  rightly,  a  furlong  or  so  beyond  the  turn there
  was  a  flat  space  at  the  top  of  a  long  steep  slope  -  very heavy

 going it was as we  came up.  From that  point I  might be  able to
 get a view, and some idea of how the snow lies further down.'      
   He  struggled  slowly   forward,  plunging   in  snow   that  was
 everywhere above  his knees,  and in  places rose  almost shoulder-
 high.  Often  he  seemed  to  be  swimming  or  burrowing  with his
 great  arms rather  than walking.  At last  he vanished  from sight
 and passed round  the turn.  He was  long gone,  and they  began to
 be anxious,  fearing that  he had  been engulfed  in some  drift or
 snow-filled hollow, or had fallen  over the  hidden brink  into the
 ravine.                                                            
   When  more  than  an  hour  had  passed they  heard him  call. He
 had  reappeared  round  the  bend  in  the  path and  was labouring
 back  towards  them, 'I  am weary,'  he said;  'but I  have brought
 back some hope. There  is a  deep wind-drift  just round  the turn,
 and I was  nearly buried  in it,  but fortunately  it is  not wide.
 Beyond it the snow suddenly gets less. At the top  of the  slope it
 is barely a foot  deep, and  further down,  white though  it looks,
 it seems to be but a light coverlet: only a sprinkling in places.'
   'It is the ill will of  Caradras,' muttered  Gimli. 'He  does not
 love dwarves, or elves. He  has cast  his snow  at us  with special
 intent. That drift was devised to cut off our descent.'            
   'Then  Caradras  happily  has forgotten  that we  have with  us a
 mountaineer  who  knows  his far  kindred, the  peaks of  the Black
 Mountains,'  said  Gandalf.  'It was  a good  fortune that  gave us
 Boromir as a member of our Company.'                               
   'But how are we to get through this  drift, even  if we  ever get
 as far as the turn?' asked Pippin, voicing the thoughts of  all the
 hobbits.                                                           
   'It is a pity,' said Legolas, 'that Gandalf  cannot go  before us
 with a bright flame, and melt us a path.'                          
   'It is a pity that Elves cannot fly over mountains, and fetch the
 Sun  to save  them,' answered  Gandalf. 'Even  I need  something to
 work  on.  I  cannot burn  snow. But  I could  turn Legolas  into a
 flaming torch, if that will serve:  he would  burn bright  while he
 lasted.'                                                           
   'Spare me!' cried Legolas. 'I fear that a dragon is  concealed in
 the  shape of  our wizard.  Yet a  tame dragon  would be  useful at
 this hour.'                                                        
   'It will be a wild dragon, if you say any more,' said Gandalf.
   'Well, well!  When heads  are at  a loss,  bodies must  serve, as
 they say in my country,' said Boromir. 'I have some  strength still
 left; and so has Aragorn. We must use that, while it lasts.  I will

 carry  one  of  the  Little Folk,  and he  another. Two  shall be  set on
 the pony, and led by Gandalf.'                                           
   At  once  he  set  about  unlading  Bill.  'Aragorn  and  I  will  come
 back  when  we  have  got  the  Little  Folk  through,'  he  said.  'You,
 Legolas  and  Gimli,  can  wait  here,  or  follow  behind in  our track,
 if  you  can.'  He  picked  up  Merry  and  set  him  on  his  shoulders.
 Trotter  took  Pippin.  Frodo  was   mounted  on   the  pony,   with  Sam
 clinging behind. They ploughed forward.                                  
   At  last  they  reached  and  passed  the  turn, and  came to  the edge
 of  the  drift.  Frodo  marvelled  at  the  strength  of  Boromir, seeing
 the  passage  that  he  had  already  forced  through  it with  no better
 tool   than  his   sword  and   his  great arms.(25) Even now, burdened
 as  he  was  with  Merry  clinging  on  his  back,  he was  thrusting the
 snow   forward   and   aside,   and  widening   the  passage   for  those
 who  followed.   Behind  him   Trotter  was   labouring.  They   were  in
 the   midst   of   the  drift,   and  Boromir   and  Merry   were  almost
 through,  when  a  rumbling  stone  fell  from   the  slope   above  and,
 hurtling  close  to  Frodo's  head,  thudded  deep  into  the  snow.  But
 with  the  casting  of  that  last  stone  the  malice  of  the  mountain
 seemed  to  be  expended,  as  if  it  were  satisfied that  the invaders
 were  in  retreat  and   would  not   dare  to   return.  There   was  no
 further mishap.                                                          
   On  the  flat  shelf  above  the  steep  slope  they found,  as Boromir
 had   reported,   that   the   snow   was   only   shallow.   There  they
 waited,   while   Trotter  and   Boromir  returned   with  the   pony  to
 fetch  the  packs  and  burdens  and  give  some  help  to   Legolas  and
 the dwarf.                                                               
   By   the   time  they   were  all   gathered  together   again  morning
 was far advanced.                                                        
                                                                         
   It was Gandalf's reply here ('It is a pity that  Elves cannot  fly over
 mountains,  and  fetch  the  Sun  to  save  them')  to   Legolas'  remark
 (originally  Boromir's,  VI.426)  about  melting  a  path  that   led  to
 Legolas' saying in FR 'I go to find the Sun!', and was very probably (as
 I  think) the  source of  the idea  that the  Elf, so  far from  being as
 helplessly marooned as Gimli, Gandalf,  and the  hobbits, could  run upon
 the snow. It is noticeable that Gandalf's real ill-humour in the original
 version is here diminished, while in FR it has probably disappeared.     
   The remainder of the chapter is as in FR, but it ends thus:            
                                                                         
   The wind was blowing stiffly again over the pass that was              
 hidden in cloud behind them; already a few flakes of snow were           
 curling and drifting  down. Caradras  had defeated  them. They           

 turned their backs on the Dimrill Stair, and stumbled wearily            
 down the slope.                                                          
                                                                         
                                   NOTES.                                 
                                                                         
  1. This refers to the story, first appearing in  the original  version of
     'The  Council  of  Elrond'  (VI.407)  and   retained  in   the  second
     (p.  112),  that  Gandalf  came  upon  the  hobbits  walking   in  the
     woods in the afternoon following the Council.                        
  2. This  is  probably  the  point at  which my  father determined  on the
     change  of  Galdor  to  Legolas  (see p.  141). Legolas  Greenleaf the
     keen-eyed  thus  reappears  after  many  years  from  the old  tale of
     The  Fall  of  Gondolin (II.189,  etc.); he  was of  the House  of the
     Tree in Gondolin, of which Galdor was the lord.                      
  3. In fact, nine had been the original  number, in  the first  sketch for
     'The  Council  of  Elrond'  (VI.397):  Frodo,  Sam;  Gandalf; Glorfin-
     del; Trotter; Burin son  of Balin;  Merry, Folco,  Odo. It  is curious
     to  see  how   close  in   its  conception   the  complement   of  the
     Company  was  at  the  very  beginning  to the  final form,  though it
     was at once rejected.                                                
  4. On Erestor 'Half-elf' see VI.400 and note 17.                        
  5. The  word  'reduction'  may  however  imply  that  the  first  of  two
     alternative  versions  of  the  final  'Choosing  of the  Company' had
     already been written; see note 12.                                   
  6. This  latter  option  survived into  a typescript  text made  not long
     after  (probably  by  myself), where  the long  and short  openings of
     the chapter are set out one after the other as variants.             
  7. On the days of the week in relation to  the dates  see p.  14. Frodo's
     escape  over  the  Ford  of   Bruinen  took   place  on   Thursday  20
     October.  If  precisely  three  weeks  are  counted  from that  day we
     are brought to Thursday 10 November.                                 
  8. Tharbad:  see  the  Etymologies,  V.392,  stem   THAR;  and   see  Map
     II on p. 305.                                                        
  9. In  the  original  form of  the passage  (VI.416) and  in that  in the
     second  version  of  'The  Council  of  Elrond',  as  well  as  in the
     present  text,  my  father wrote  'the sources  of the  Gladden'. This
     was  obviously  based  on  the  Map  of  Wilderland  in   The  Hobbit,
     where  the  Gladden,  there  of  course  unnamed,  rises   in  several
     streams  falling  from  the  Misty  Mountains  (these  are  not  shown
     on  the  First  Map  (Map II,  p. 305),  but the  scale there  is much
     smaller). In the typescript that followed the present text  the typist
     put  source,  and  my  father  corrected  it  to  sources.  I  suspect
     therefore that source in FR is an error.                             
 10. Rhosgobel  has  appeared  previously,  but  as  a  subsequent addition

                
                                                                         
      to  the  fifth  version  of  'The  Council of  Elrond' (p.  149); the
      present  passage  is  clearly   where  the   name  was   devised.  In
      Brownhay  'Brown'  is  evidently  to  be  associated   with  Radagast
      'the Brown', and 'hay' is  the old  word meaning  'hedge', as  in the
      High  Hay,  Ringhay  (=  Crickhollow,  VI.299).  For   the  etymology
      of  Rhosgobel  see  V.385,  Noldorin  rhosc  'brown'  (stem  RUSKA),
      and  V.380,  Noldorin  gobel  'fenced  homestead',  as   in  Tavrobel
      (stem PEL(ES)).                                                     
  11. Redway: original name of the Silverlode.                            
  12. The  brief  account  of  the  'Choosing'  given  on  p.  162  may  be
      compared:  'In  the end  after the  matter had  been much  debated by
      Elrond and Gandalf it was decided... ' It is possible that  this text
      followed  the  first  and  preceded  the  second  of  the alternative
      versions: my father  referred to  the second  as the  'short version'
      (though  it  is  not  markedly  shorter  than  the other),  which may
      explain why he noted on the brief draft text that it was a  sketch of
      a  'reduction'  of  the  choosing  of  the  Company.  -  As  with the
      variant  openings  of  the  chapter (note  6) both  alternatives were
      retained in the typescript.                                         
  13. A  few  minor  changes  were  introduced  (but  not  the  mention  of
      the lay of Beren  and Luthien  heard by  the hobbits  in the  Hall of
      Fire);  Bilbo  now refers  to the  fact that  Frodo's sword  had been
      broken (see p. 136, note  7), but  does not  produce the  pieces (and
      the mailcoat remains 'elf-mail', not 'dwarf-mail').                 
  14. In these workings the last verse  (for which  there is  a preparatory
      note: 'He ends: but all the while he will think of Frodo') reads:
                                                                         
                  But all the while I sit and think                       
                     I listen for the door,                               
                  and hope to hear the voices come                        
                     I used to hear before.                               
                                                                         
      This is the form of the verse in the typescript text, where  the song
      first appears in the chapter.                                       
  15. A  halfway stage  is found  in a  draft for  the passage:  here there
      were still  two pack-ponies,  but one  of them  was the  beast bought
      in Bree;  this Sam  addresses as  'Ferny', though  it is  also called
      'Bill'. Cf. the note about  Bill Ferny's  pony given  on p.  9: 'Does
      this remain at Rivendell? - Yes.'                                   
  16. Eregion  was  written  in  subsequently  (this  name  appears  in the
      isolated  text  given  on p.  124). No  Elvish name  is given  in the
      typescript.                                                         
  17. This  is  the  first  occurrence  of  the  name Dwarrowdelf.  Cf. my
      father's  letter  to  Stanley  Unwin,  15  October 1937  (Letters no.
      17):  'The  real  "historical"  plural  of  dwarf  ...  is  dwarrows,
      anyway: rather a nice word,  but a  bit too  archaic. Still  I rather
      wish  I  had  used  the  word   dtuarrow.'  -   'Black  Gulf'   as  a
      translation of Moria is found several times in  the original  text of

      'The  Ring  Goes  South',  once  as  a  correction  of   'Black  Pit'
      (VI.435, note 24).                                                     
  18. This  is  the  first  occurrence  of  the  Dwarvish  name Barazinbar,
      concerning  which  my  father   wrote  long   after  (in   the  notes
      referred  to  in  VI.466,  notes  36,  39)  that Khuzdul  baraz (BRZ)
      probably  =  'red,  or  ruddy',  and  inbar  (MBR)  a  horn, Sindarin
      Caradhras  <  caran-rass   being  a   translation  of   the  Dwarvish
      name.   -  Subsequently   both  Caradhras   and  Caradras   occur  as
      the  manuscript  was  originally  written,  but  the latter  far more
      frequently.                                                            
  19. On  Azanulbizar  see  VI.465,  note   36.  Nanduhirion   here  first
      occurs,  but  the  form  Nanduhiriath  is found  as an  emendation to
      the text of the original version of the chapter, VI.433, note 13.      
  20. On Dimrill Stair as the name of the Redhorn Pass see p. 164.           
  21. The  names  of  the  other  Mountains  of Moria  were not  devised at
      once,  however,  since  though  entered  on  the manuscript  they are
      still absent from the typescript,  where my  father inserted  them in
      the same form. As first devised, the  names of  the other  peaks were
      Silverhorn,  Celebras  (Kelebras)  the   White  (in   FR  Silvertine,
      Celebdil),  and  the  Horn  of  Cloud,  Fanuiras  the  Grey   (in  FR
      Cloudyhead,   Fanuidhol);  the   Dwarvish  names   were  as   in  FR,
      Baraz,  Zirak,  Shathur  (but  Zirak was  momentarily Zirik).  In the
      later notes referred to in note 18 my father said that  since Shathur
      was  the  basic  Dwarvish  name  the   element  probably   refers  to
      'cloud', and was probably a plural 'clouds';  Bund(u) in  the fuller
      name  Bundu-shathur  'must  therefore   mean  "head"   or  something
      similar. Possibly bund ( BND) - u - Shathur "head in/of clouds>.     
      On Zirak and the longer form Zirakzigil see note 22.                   
  22. When  Silverlode  superseded   Blackroot,  as   it  did   before  the
      original text of the  'Lothlorien' story  was completed,  the passage
      was  changed  to  its  form  in  FR:  Dark  is  the water  of Kheled-
      zaram,"  said  Gimli,  "and cold  are the  springs of  Kibil-nala."'
      The  name  Kheledzaram  first  appears  in  these  variant  passages;
      see  VI.466,  note  39,  where I  cited my  father's much  later note
      explaining the name  as meaning  'glass-pool'. In  the same  notes he
      discussed the Dwarvish word for 'silver':                              
        Zirak-zigil  should  mean  'Silver-spike'  (cf.  'Silvertine',  and
      Celebdil < Sindarin celeb 'silver' + till 'tine, spike,  point'). But
      'silver'  is  evidently  KBL  in  Kibil-nala  -  KBL  seems  to  have
      some   connexion  with   Quenya  telep-   'silver'.  But   all  these
      peoples  seem  to  have  possessed  various  words  for  the precious
      metals,  some  referring  to  the material  and its  properties, some
      to  their  colour  and  other  associations. So  that zirak  (ZRK) is
      probably another name  for 'silver',  or for  its grey  colour. Zigil
      is evidently  a word  for 'spike'  (smaller and  more slender  than a
      'horn').   Caradhras   seems   to   have   been   a   great  mountain
                                                                            
                                                                            j

      tapering upwards (like the Matterhorn), while Celebdil was        
      simply crowned by a smaller pinnacle.                             
                                                                       
      Still later pencilled notes reversed this  explanation, suggesting
      that zigil (ZGL)  meant 'silver'  and zirak  meant 'spike'.  - Of
      Kibil-nala  my  father  noted  that  'the meaning  of nala  is not
      known.  If  it  corresponds to  rant [in  Celebrant] and  lode [in
      Silverlode], it should mean "path,  course, rivercourse  or bed".'
      He added later: 'It is  probable that  the Dwarves  actually found
      silver in the river.'                                             
  23. Delduath:   'Deadly   Nightshade',   Taur-na-Fuin;  Dor-Daedeloth:
      'Land  of  the  Shadow  of  Dread',  the  realm  of  Morgoth.  See
      references  in  the  Index  to  Vol.  V,  entries  Delduwath, Dor-
      Daideloth.                                                        
  24. Literally: 'fire be for saving of us'.                            
  25. The passage that follows here must have been  rejected as  soon as
      written:                                                          
      As  he  stepped   forward  Boromir   suddenly  stumbled   on  some
      hidden point of stone, and  fell headlong.  Trotter, who  was just
      behind,  was  taken unawares  and fell  on top  of him.  Merry and
      Pippin  were  flung from  their shoulders  and vanished  deep into
      the snow.                                                         
      This, though changed to suit the altered story of the descent, was
      derived from the old version, VI.427.                             

                                     IX.                                  
                          THE MINES OF MORIA (1):                         
                             THE LORD OF MORIA.                           
                                                                         
 It  seems  very  probable,  if  not  actually  demonstrable,  that  a  new
 version  of the  first part  of the  Moria story  (corresponding to  FR II
 Chapter  4,  'A  Journey in  the Dark')  preceded the  first draft  of its
 continuation, and I therefore give the texts in their  narrative sequence.
 The  original  draft  of  'The  Mines  of Moria'  (VI.445-60) had  come to
 an  end  as  the  Company  stood  before the  tomb of  Balin, and  at this
 time  the  narrative of  The Lord  of the  Rings went  no further  - apart
 from  a preliminary  sketch of  the further  events in  Moria, VI.442  - 3
 and 462. This therefore  is the  last chapter  for which  formed narrative
 from an earlier phase of work existed.                                   
  In a manuscript that bears  a distinct  resemblance in  style to  that of
 the new version of 'The Ring Goes  South' described  in the  last chapter,
 my  father  now  rewrote  the  first  part  of  the  story of  the journey
 through  the  Mines. As  in the  last chapter,  there are  a few  pages of
 rough  initial  drafting for  particular passages,  but (unless  more have
 been  lost)  the  development  of  the  new   version  was   very  largely
 achieved in the  actual writing  of this  manuscript, which  is a  mass of
 (mostly  small)  corrections  made   at  the   time  of   composition.  Of
 subsequent pencilled emendation there is not  a great  deal, for  the text
 of FR II.4 was effectively reached here: for most of  its length  the only
 differences from the  final form  are extremely  minor points  of sentence
 structure and choice  of words,  with no  significance for  the narrative,
 and  for  substantial  stretches the  two texts  are identical.  There are
 however certain features where this is not the case.                     
  The  chapter,  numbered  XVI,  was  given  a title,  'The Mines  of Moria
 (i)'. Pencilled titles were written in  beside this:  'The Lord  of Moria'
 and 'The Tomb'; the  latter was  struck through,  and the  typescript that
 followed  this  manuscript  was  titled:  'The  Mines  of  Moria  (1): The
 Lord  of  Moria'.  The  original  version  had  included  the   debate  of
 the  Company  after  the  descent  from  the  Pass  of Cris-caron  and the
 discussion  of Moria  in 'The  Ring Goes  South' (VI.428  - 30),  and 'The
 Mines  of  Moria'  had  begun  at  'Next  day  the weather  changed again'
 (VI.445;  FR  p.  313). Now,  of course,  the new  chapter XVI  follows on
 from the end of the new chapter XV, and the division is as in FR.        
  Aragorn  is  called  Trotter  throughout,  and  throughout   Trotter  was
 changed later in pencil to Elfstone (see pp. 277 - 8).                   

            
                                                                          
  In  the  debate  of  the  Company Boromir's  references to  the geography
 of the southern lands are very curious (cf. FR p. 309):                   
                                                                          
  'It  is  a  name  of  ill-omen,'  said Boromir.  'Nor do  I see  the need
 to  go  there.  If  we  cannot  cross  the  mountains,  let  us  take  the
 road   to   my  land   that  I   followed  on   my  way   hither:  through
 Rohan  and  the  country  of  Seven  Streams.  Or  we  could  go   on  far
 into  the  South   and  come   at  length   round  the   Black  Mountains,
 and  crossing  the  rivers  Isen  and  Silverlode (1) enter  Ond   from  the
 regions nigh the sea.'                                                    
  'Things   have   changed   since   you   came   north,   Boromir,'   said
 Gandalf.  'Did   you  not   hear  what   I  told   of  Saruman?   We  must
 not  come  near  Isengard  or  the  Gap   of  Rohan.   As  for   the  even
 longer road, we cannot afford the time....'                               
                                                                          
 The remainder of Gandalf's reply is  very much  as in  FR, except  that he
 tells Boromir that 'you are free to leave  us and  return to  Minas Tirith
 by any road you choose.'                                                  
  The  'Seven  Rivers'  have  been  referred  to  in  the first  version of
 Gandalf's  story  to  the  Council  of  Elrond,  where  he  reported Rada-
 gast's words to him (p.  132): 'even  if you  set out  this hour  you will
 hardly  come  to him  [Saruman] before  the Nine  cross the  Seven Rivers'
 (in  the  next  version  this becomes  'before the  Nine have  crossed the
 seventh river', p. 149).                                                  
  Features  of  the geography  much further  to the  South were  already in
 being. Before the story had got very much  further it  is made  plain that
 'the Land of Seven  Streams' lay  'between the  mountains [i.e.  the Black
 Mountains,  the  later White  Mountains] and  the sea'  (see p.  272); yet
 Boromir's  words  here  seem  only  to  allow of  a quite  contrary inter-
 pretation  of  'the  country of  Seven Streams'.  The choices  he proposes
 are  essentially  as  in  FR: through  Rohan from  the West  (i.e. passing
 through the  Gap of  Rohan) and  so to  Minas Tirith,  or going  on South,
 crossing  the  Isen,  and  coming  to  Minas  Tirith  through   the  lands
 between the mountains and  the sea;  but they  will traverse  'the country
 of Seven Streams' if they choose the first option, and  pass north  of the
 mountains. I cannot explain  this, except  on the  assumption that  it was
 a  mere  slip,  or  else  on the  assumption that  the geography  of these
 regions  was  still  in  a  more  fluid  state  than  one  would otherwise
 suppose.                                                                  
  The river  Isen first  appears here in the narrative,(2) and  the 'Silver-
 lode',  which  was  afterwards  the  'Blackroot',  the  two   names  being
 transposed (see p. 235). In this passage also are the first occurrences of
 an  Elvish  name  for  Sauron's  dwelling  in  Southern  Mirkwood,  and of
 the name Barad-dur:                                                      
                                                                          
 'I alone of you have ever been in the dungeons of the Dark Lord;          

 and only in his older and lesser dwelling at Dol-Dugol in                
 Southern Mirkwood. Those who pass the gates of Barad-dur,                
 the Dark Tower in the Land of Shadow, do not return.'                    
                                                                         
 The confusion over Thror and Thrain is  no longer  present: 'Yet  it will
 not be the first time that I have been to Moria: I sought there  long for
 Thrain son of Thror after he was  lost.' And  Trotter utters  his warning
 to  Gandalf  (on  the  change  of  roles between  Gandalf and  Trotter in
 their willingness to consider the passage of Moria see p. 168).          
  The  episode  of  the  attack  by  the  Wargs enters  in this  text, and
 reached virtually the final form outright, with relatively little correc-
 tion in the course of  composition;(3) and the account  of the  journey of
 the  Company from  the little  hill where  the attack  took place  to the
 arrival of Gandalf, Gimli, and Frodo at the top of the steps by the Stair
 Falls reaches  the FR  text in  almost every  point.(4) But Gandalf's words
 when  they  saw  what  had   happened  to   the  Gate-stream   were  much
 changed.  At  first  he  made  no  reference  to  the  Door(s);  then the
 following was substituted:                                               
                                                                         
  'That  is  where  the  Door  stood  once  upon  a  time,' said          
 Gandalf pointing across the  water to  the cliff  opposite. But          
 Frodo could see  nothing that  marked the  spot, unless  it was          
 some bushes at the foot of the wall, and some rotting stems and          
 branches that stood up from the water near its further side.             
                                                                         
 This was in turn rejected and replaced by:                               
                                                                         
  'That   is   where   the   Doors   stood   once   upon  a   time,'  said
 Gandalf  pointing  across  the  water.  'There  was  the   Elven-door  at
 the  end  of  the  road  from  Hollin  by  which  we  have  come, [struck
 out:  and   the  Dwarven-door   further  south].   We  must   get  across
 [struck  out:  to  the  Elven-door]  as quickly  as we  can. This  way is
 blocked....'                                                             
                                                                         
  The  idea  that  there  were  two  distinct  western entrances  to Moria
 had  appeared  in  the  original  version,  where Gandalf  said (VI.429):
 'There  were  two  secret  gates on  the western  side, though  the chief
 entrance was  on the  East.' Gandalf's  words in  the present  passage in
 FR  (p.  315): 'And  there the  Gate stood  once upon  a time,  the Elven
 Door  at  the  end  of  the  road  from  Hollin  by  which we  have come'
 derive  from  this,  although in  the context  of FR,  where there  is no
 'Dwarven  Door',  the  'Elven  Door'  is understood  in relation  to what
 Gandalf  said  subsequently:  'the  West-door was  made chiefly  for [the
 Elves'] use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria'  (an idea  which in
 fact  goes  back  to the  original version,  VI.448: 'the  westgates were

                                        
                                                                           
 made chiefly for their use in their traffic with the dwarves').  See further
 p. 191 and note 3.                                                         
                                                                           
  The  many  references  to  the  Moon  in  this  part  of  the  chapter were
 almost  all  removed  by  emendation  to the  typescript that  followed this
 manuscript, and do not  appear in  FR. All  references to  the time  of day,
 and the sunset, are here precisely as in FR to this point in the  story, but
 after the words  'The day  was drawing  to its  end' (FR  p. 315)  my father
 wrote:  'and  the  moon  was  already shining  on the  edge of  the sunset',
 where  FR  has  'and  cold stars  were glinting  in the  sky high  above the
 sunset'.  As  Pippin,  the last  in the  Company (in  FR Sam),  stepped onto
 the  dry  ground  after  wading  through  the  'green  and   stagnant  pool'
 (following  the  old  version:  in  FR  'a  narrow  creek')  at  the  north-
 ernmost end of the lake,  and there  was 'a  swish, followed  by a  plop' in
 the  distant  water,  'at  that  moment  shadows came  over the  last gleams
 of  the  sunset,  and  the  rising  moon  was  veiled  in a  passing cloud.'
 'Rising' can only  be a  slip without  significance; but  here FR  has: 'The
 dusk deepened, and  the last  gleams of  the sunset  were veiled  in cloud.'
 The two great holly-trees beneath the cliff stood 'stiff, dark,  and silent,
 throwing  deep  shadows  in  the   moon',  where   FR  has   'throwing  deep
 night-shadows about their feet'. Thus  in FR  there is  no reference  to the
 moon  until  Gandalf  passed  his  hands  over  the  smooth  space   on  the
 cliff-wall and 'The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock'.        
  After   this   point,  other   references  to   the  Moon   were  similarly
 removed. When Gandalf's  spells had  no effect,  it is  said here  that 'the
 moon  shone  pale, the  wind blew  cold, and  the doors  stood fast';  in FR
 'the countless  stars were  kindled,' etc.  When the  doors at  last opened,
 'a  shadowy  stair could  be seen  climbing steeply  up. The  moonlight fell
 upon  the  lower  steps,  but beyond  the darkness  was deeper  than night';
 in  FR  the  reference  to  the  moonlight  on  the  steps  is  absent.  The
 tentacles  of  the   Watcher  in   the  Water   'came  wriggling   over  the
 threshold, glistening in the  moon', where  FR (p.  322) has  'glistening in
 the  starlight'.  But  inside  Moria,  when  Gandalf  stood in  doubt before
 the  archway  opening  into  three passages,  and said  in the  present text
 'It is all night inside here; but  outside the  moon has  long sunk  and the
 night  is  getting  old  [>  the  moon  is  sinking and  the dark  hours are
 passing]',  in FR  he said  'outside the  late Moon  is riding  westward and
 the middle-night has passed.'                                              
  My father had said that six  nights before,  the first  night march  of the
 Company  from  Hollin  (p.  167),  the Moon  was 'almost  at the  full' ('at
 the  full',  FR);  and  on  the  previous  night,  when  the  Wargs attacked
 again,  'the  night  was  old,  and  westward the  waning moon  was setting'
 (so  also  in  FR).  My  father  had  forgotten  this, and  as he  wrote the
 present  version  he  evidently  saw  a  young  moon  in the  West ('shining
 on  the  edge  of  the sunset').  When he  realised that  the moon  must now
 be almost  into its  last quarter  and rising  late he  changed the  text as

 described  above;  but  surely  the reference  to the  moon shining  on the
 cliff-face should have been removed with all the others?(5)                
                                                                           
   A  narrative  element  that  came  to  nothing is  seen in  some rejected
 passages. While Gandalf was 'gazing at the  blank wall  of the  cliff' (FR
 p. 317) it is said that Legolas (who in FR was  'pressed against  the rock,
 as  if listening')  'exploring southward  along the  lake-side was  lost in
 the  twilight  ., and  when the  ripples on  the water  came closer  to the
 shore 'the voice of Legolas  was calling;  his feet  were running  in haste
 towards  them.'  As   Bill  the   pony  dashed   away  into   the  darkness
 'Legolas  ran  up  breathless  with  his drawn  knife in  his hand;  he was
 talking wildly in the elvish tongue' - but this  was evidently  rejected as
 soon  as  written  in  view  of  what  is  said subsequently,  when Gandalf
 drove  the  Company  into  the  doorway:  'Legolas  at  last  came  running
 up, gasping for breath'  and sprang  over the  tentacles that  were already
 fingering  the  cliff-wall;  'Gimli  grasped  him  by  the hand  and draped
 him inside.' It was at this point that my father abandoned the idea.(6)    
                                                                           
   As  first written,  the description  of the  design that  Gandalf brought
 to  light  was  scarcely  developed  from  the  original  account (VI.449).
 Beneath the arch  of interlacing  letters 'in  the elvish  character' there
 were  'the  outlines  of  an  anvil and  hammer surmounted  by a  crown and
 crescent moon. More clearly  than all  else there  shone forth  three stars
 with many rays.' It  is now  Gimli, not  Gandalf, who  says 'There  are the
 emblems of  Durin!', and  Legolas says  'And there  are the  star-tokens of
 the High-elves!'  Gandalf still  says that  'they are  made of  some silver
 substance  that  is  seen  only  when  touched  by  one  who  knows certain
 words',  but  he  adds:  'and  I  guess  too  that they  shine only  in the
 moonlight'  (in the  original text,  when the  story was  that the  sun was
 shining on the  cliff-wall, he  said 'at  night under  the moon  they shine
 most bright').  His words  were changed,  apparently at  once, to  the text
 of  FR: 'They  are made  of ithildin (7) that mirrors  only the  starlight and
 the  moonlight, and  sleeps until  it is  touched by  one who  speaks words
 now long forgotten in Middle-earth.'                                       
   The description of the design itself was changed to read:                
                                                                           
 ...  the  outlines  of  an  anvil  and  hammer   surmounted  by   a  crown
 with  seven  stars.  Below  were  two  trees  bearing  a   crescent  moon.
 More  clearly  than  all  else  there  shone  forth in  the middle  of the
 door a single star with many rays.                                         
   'There are the emblems of Durin!' cried Gimli.                          
   'And there is the Tree of the High-elves!' said Legolas.                 
   'They are made of ithildin,' said Gandalf...                             
                                                                           
 Gandalf's reference in FR to 'the Star of the House of Feanor' is thus     
 absent.                                                                    
   There is found in this manuscript, as an integral part of the text, the 

  earliest  drawing  of  the  arch and  the signs  beneath (reproduced  on p.
  182).(8) It will be seen that this  drawing fits  the revised  description, in
  that  the  crown  is  accompanied  by  seven  stars,  there  are  two trees
  surmounted  by  crescent  moons,  and  there  is  only  one  star   in  the
  centre,  not  three  as in  the first  description. The  natural assumption
  would  be  that  the  alteration  of  the  description  in the  text, which
  stands  on  the  page  preceding  the  drawing,  was made  immediately; but
  in that case it is very puzzling that a little later in this  version, when
  Gandalf  uttered  the  word  Mellon,  'the three  stars shone  out briefly,
  and faded again' (which was not corrected).                                
    Taum  Santoski  has  provided  the  explanation  of  this  characteristic
  textual impasse. The fuzziness at the top of the trees  is caused  by heavy
  erasures; and he suggests that in the  drawing as  it was  originally made,
  accompanying the first  description in  the text,  there were  three stars:
  the  one  in  the  centre was  retained, but  the two  to either  side were
  erased and replaced by trees. I  have no  doubt whatever  that this  is the
  correct solution. The revised description in the text thus fits the revised
  drawing;  and  at  that  time  my  further  merely  failed  to  notice  the
  subsequent  reference  to  the  three  stars  when  Gandalf spoke  the word
  Mellon.                                                                    
    An  erasure  above  the  crown   shows  that   there  was   originally  a
  crescent  moon  here,  as  in  the  first  form  of  the  description. Taum
  Santoski has  also been  able to  see that  in a  preliminary stage  of the
  introduction  of  the  two  trees  they were  larger, and  each had  both a
  circle (whether a sun or a full moon) and a crescent above it.(9)          
    When  Gandalf  was  striving  to  find  the  spell  that  would  open the
  doors he said that he once knew  'every spell  in all  the tongues  of Elf,
  Dwarf,  or  Goblin'  (FR  'of  Elves  or  Men  or Orcs')  that was  ever so
  used; he did not say 'I shall not have to call  on Gimli  for words  of the
  secret dwarf-tongue that they  teach to  none'; and  he declared  that 'the
  opening  word  was  Elvish'  (FR  'the  opening   words  were   Elvish')  -
  anticipating the solution of the riddle. The words of the first  spell that
  Gandalf tried remain exactly as in  the original  version (VI.451);  but as
  already  indicated  the  opening  word  is  now  Mellon as  in FR,  not the
  plural Mellyn as formerly.                                                 
    When  Frodo  asked  Gandalf  what  he  thought  of  the  monster  in  the
  water of the lake (FR p. 323) Gandalf at first replied: 'I  do not  know. I
  have  never  before  seen  or  heard  tell  of such  a creature'.  This was
  struck  out  and  replaced  by  the  words in  FR, 'but  the arms  were all
  guided by one purpose'. Possibly in relation to this, there is  a pencilled
  note  at this  point in  the manuscript:  '? Insert  words of  Gimli saying
  that  there  were  traditions  among the  Dwarves about  strangling fingers
  in the dark.' - 'Goblins' appear  again, as  in the  old version,  where FR
  has 'Orcs', in Gandalf's 'There are  older and  fouler things  than goblins
  in the deep places of the world.'                                          
    In  the  account  of  the  two  long  marches  through  Moria  there  are

               The West Gate of Moria:              
  the earliest drawing of the inscription and signs.

  scarcely any differences to be remarked. It is  'the hobbits'  (not Pippin)
  who  dared  not  make  the leap  over the  great fissure  (FR p.  325); and
  Sam's mention of rope ('I knew I'd want it, if I hadn't got it!') is absent
  -  just  as  the passage  in which  he goes  through his  belongings before
  leaving Rivendell and discovers that he has no rope  ('Well, I'll  want it.
  I can't get it now', FR p. 294) is  absent from  the preceding  chapter (p.
  165).(10)                                                                  
    When  the  Company  came  to  the  great  hall in  which they  passed the
  second  night  (and  which  Gandalf  declared, as  in FR,  was a  good deal
  higher  than  'the  Dimrill Gate'),  Gimli replied  thus to  Sam's question
  'They didn't live down in these nasty darksome holes, surely?':            
                                                                            
    'They were not nasty  holes, and  even now  they are  not so,            
  unless others than  the dwarves  here made  them so.  How would            
  you have passed through, and breathed and lived, if it were not            
  for the skill of the builders long ago?  Though many  shafts, I            
  doubt not, are blocked and broken with the years, the air still            
  flows and is for the most part good. And of  old the  halls and            
  mines were not darksome                                                    
                                                                            
  Here  the  text  breaks  off, all  of Gimli's  speech being  struck through
  and replaced by his words in FR: 'These are  not holes.  This is  the great
  realm  and  city  of  the  Dwarrowdelf.  And  of  old  it was  not darksome
  but full of light and splendour, as [I  will sing  you a  song >]  is still
  remembered in  our songs.'  There is  an isolated  draft for  this rejected
  speech of Gimli's, in  which it  is completed:  'And of  old they  were not
  darksome:  they  were  lit  with  many  lights  and sparkled  with polished
  metals and with gems.'                                                     
    Gimli's song  here appears  (in a  rider to  the manuscript)  written out
  clear in its  final form  (but with  countless lamps  for shining  lamps in
  the third verse, and There ruby, beryl, opal pale  for There  beryl, pearl,
  and opal  pale in  the fourth).  A few  pages of  rough drafting  are found
  (one  of  which  begins  with  the  draft  of  Gimli's  words in  praise of
  Moria  just  mentioned),  but  these do  not carry  the development  of the
  song  very  far;  more  workings  must  have  been  lost.  Only  the  verse
  beginning  The  world  was  fair,  the mountains  tall was  achieved here,
  and there is little else save fragmentary and rejected lines. There is also
  drafting (no doubt the earliest)  for a  form in  four-line stanzas  with a
  rhyme  scheme aaba  and internal  rhyme in  the third  line; of  this three
  quatrains were completed:                                                  
                                                                            
                   The world was young, the mountains green,                 
                No mark upon the moon was seen,                              
                When Durin came and gave their name                          
                To lands where none before had been.                         
                                 nameless lands bad been.                    

     The world was fair, the mountains tall,                             
      With gold and silver gleamed his hall,                              
      When Durin's throne of carven stone                                 
      Yet stood behind the guarded wall.                                  
                                                                         
     The world is dark, the mountains old,                                
     In shadow lies the heaped gold;                                      
     In Durin's halls no hammer falls,                                    
     The forges' fires are grey and cold.                                 
                                                                         
 Among many other half-formed lines or couplets are:                      
                                                                         
     When Durin woke and gave to gold                                     
     its first and secret name of old                                     
                                                                         
     When Durin carne to Azanul                                         
     and found and named the nameless pool (11)                           
                                                                         
 There  are  also  the  isolated  words  Where Nenechui  cold >  Where cold
 Echuinen  spills.  Nen  Echui  has  occurred  as  the  Noldorin  name  for
 Cuivienen,  the  Waters  of  Awakening  (V.366, 406);  here my  father was
 pondering  its  application  to  Mirrormere  (for  the  much  later Elvish
 name Nen Cenedril 'Lake Looking-glass' see VI.466, note 39).             
 On  one  of  the  pages  of  drafting  for Gimli's  song my  father wrote:
 'Gandalf on Ithil Thilevril (12) Mithril' (i.e.  Gandalf is  to speak  on this
 subject). This is the first appearance of the name Mithril,  replacing the
 passing Thilevril, Ithil, and the original Erceleb  (see VI.458  and notes
 34-5);  and  an  isolated  page  of  drafting  shows my  father developing
 Gandalf's  account  of  it.  This  text  begins  with  various   forms  of
 Gandalf's reply  to Sam's  question 'Are  there piles  of jewels  and gold
 lying about here then?' Several answers  to this  question were  tried. In
 one  Gandalf said:  'There may  be.... For  the wealth  of Durin  was very
 great: not only  in such  things as  were found  in the  Mines themselves.
 There was a great traffic to  his gates  from East  and West.'  In another
 he  said:  'No.  The  dwarves  carried  much  away;  and though  the dread
 of  its  dark mazes  has protected  Moria from  Men and  Elves it  has not
 defended it  from the  goblins, who  have often  invaded it  and plundered
 it.' Against these my father wrote: 'Mithril is now nearly all  lost. Orcs
 plunder it  and pay  tribute to  Sauron who  is collecting  it -  we don't
 know   why   -   for   some   secret   purpose   of  his   weapons  notfor
 beauty.'(13)                                                             
 The  final  version  here,  written  in  a  rapid  scrawl  with  pencilled
 additions and alterations, is as follows:                                
                                                                         
 'No  one  knows,'  said Gandalf.  'None have  dared to  seek for         
 the  armouries  and treasure  chambers down  in the  deep places         
 since the dwarves fled. Unless it be plundering orcs. It is said         
 that they were laid under  spells and  curses, when  the dwarves         
 fled.'                                                                   

   'They  were,'  said  Gimli,  'but  orcs  have  plundered  often inside
 Moria   nonetheless   [added:   and   nought  is   left  in   the  upper
 halls].'                                                                
   'They  came  here  because  of  Mithril,'  said  Gandalf. 'It  was for
 that  that  Moria  was  of  old  chiefly  renowned,   and  it   was  the
 foundation  of  the   wealth  and   power  of   Durin:  only   in  Moria
 was   mithril   found   save  rarely   and  scantily.   Moria-silver  or
 true-silver  some  have  called  it.  Mithril was  the Elvish  name: the
 dwarves  have  a  name  which  they  will  not   tell.  Its   value  was
 thrice  that  of  gold,  and  now  is  beyond  price.  It was  nearly as
 heavy  as  lead,  malleable  as  copper,  but   the  dwarves   could  by
 some secret  of theirs  make it  as hard  as [>  harder than]  steel. It
 surpassed  common silver  in all  save beauty,  and even  in that  it is
 its  equal.  [Added: It  was used  by the  Elves who  dearly loved  it -
 among  many  other  things   they  [?wrought]   it  to   make  ithildin.
 Also  perhaps  to  be  placed  here:  ...  the  dwarflords   of  Khazad-
 dum  were   wealthier  than   any  of   the  Kings   of  Men,   and  the
 traffic  to  the  Gates  brought  them  jewels  and  treasure  from many
 lands  of  East and  West.) Bilbo  had a  corslet of  mithril-rings that
 Thorin  gave  him.  I  wonder what  he did  with it.  I never  told him,
 but  its  worth  was   greater  than   the  value   of  the   Shire  and
 everything in it.'(14)                                                  
   [Added:  Frodo  laid  his  hand under  his tunic,  and felt  the rings
 of  the  mail-shirt,  and  felt  somewhat  staggered  to  think  he  was
 walking about with the price [of the] Shire...]                         
                                                                        
   The text of the passage that  appears in  the completed  manuscript is
 very close to FR. It is still said that  mithril was  not found  only in
 Moria: 'Here alone in the world, save rarely and scantily in far eastern
 mountains,  was  found  Moria-silver.' The  reference to  Bilbo's having
 given  his  mailcoat  to  'Michel  Delving Museum'  (not 'Mathom-house')
 appears.                                                                
   But there is one important difference. It is said  in this  text: 'The
 dwarves tell no tale, but even as  mithril was  the foundation  of their
 wealth so also it was their  destruction: they  delved too  greedily and
 too deep, and disturbed that from which they fled.'(15) This is  exactly as
 in FR, but without the last two words: Durin's Bane. In  this connection
 also, where Gandalf  says in  FR: 'And  since the  dwarves fled,  no one
 dares to seek the shafts and treasuries  down in  the deep  places: they
 are drowned in water - or in a shadow of fear', my father first wrote in
 this manuscript: '... some are drowned in  water, and  some are  full of
 the evil from which the dwarves fled and of which they will  not speak.'
 This was changed to: '... they are drowned in water - or in shadow.'
   The  absence  of the  words 'Durin's  Bane' does  not of  course prove

  that  the  conception  of  'Durin's  Bane'  had  not  yet  arisen;  while  a
  feeling  that  the  words  'some  are  full  of  the  evil  from  which  the
  dwarves fled' are  not really  appropriate to  the Balrog  is too  slight to
  build  on.  That  there  was  a  Balrog  in  Moria  appears in  the original
  sketch for the story given in VI.462. Even so, I think  it probable  that at
  this  stage  it  was  not  the  Balrog  that  had caused  the flight  of the
  Dwarves   from   the   great   Dwarrowdelf   long   before.   The  strongest
  evidence  for  this  comes  from  the  original  version  of  the Lothlorien
  story, where it is  at least  strongly suggested  (being represented  as the
  opinion  of  the  Lord  and  Lady of  Lothlorien) that  the Balrog  had been
  sent  from  Mordor  not  long  since (see  further on  this question  p. 247
  and  note  11).  Moreover,  in  the  texts  of  the story  of the  Bridge of
  Khazad-dum  from  this  time  Gimli  does  not   cry  out   'Durin's  Bane!'
  (pp. 197, 202-3).                                                           
    I  think  also that  Gandalf is  represented as  not knowing  himself what
  was the evil from  which the  Dwarves fled  (it cannot  be said,  of course,
  what my father knew).(16)                                                   
                                                                             
    There  is nothing  else to  note in  the remainder  of the  chapter except
  the  Runic  inscription  on the  tomb of  Balin (on  which see  the Appendix
  on  Runes,  pp.  456  -  7).  Gandalf's words  about the  inscription differ
  from  what  he  says  in FR:  'These are  dwarf-runes, such  as they  use in
  the North. Here  is written  in the  old tongue  and the  new: Balin  son of
  Fundin,  Lord  of  Moria.'  In  FR  he  says:  'These  are  Daeron's  Runes,
  such  as  were  used of  old in  Moria. Here  is written  in the  tongues of
  Men and Dwarves...'                                                         
    The  inscription is  written on  a strip  of blue  paper,(17) and  since that
  could  not  be  reproduced  in  black  and  white  there is  here reproduced
  instead  the  version  from  the  typescript  that followed  the manuscript,
  this being very closely similar to the first in its design and  identical in
  all its forms.                                                              
                                                                             
                                                       
                                                                             
                                                            
                                                                             
    The inscription reads:                                                    
                                                                             
                              BALIN SON OF FUNDIN                             
                                                                             
                                 LORD OF MORIA                                
                        Balin Fundinul Uzbad Khazaddumu.                      

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
  1. Silverlode was  changed in  pencil to  Blackroot; see  p. 235.  At the
     same time Ond was changed to Ondor.                                  
  2. On  the  First  Map  the  name was  first Iren,  changed to  Isen; see
     p. 298.                                                              
  3. Gandalf's  cry  as  he  tossed  the  blazing  brand  into the  air (FR
     p. 312) here takes the form: Naur ad i gaurhoth!                     
  4. The references to the 'power  that wished  now to  have a  clear light
     in  which  things  that  moved  in  the  wild could  be seen  from far
     away',  and  Gandalf's  remark  that  'here  Aragorn cannot  guide us;
     he  has  seldom  walked  in  this  country',  are  lacking;   while  a
     comment  is  made  in  this  text  on the  fact of  the land  in which
     Gandalf  sought  for  the  Sirannon,  the  Gate-stream,  being  'bleak
     and dry': 'not a flake of snow seemed to have fallen there.'         
  5. The  change  in  the  present  text  of  'outside  the  moon  has long
     sunk'  to 'outside  the moon  is sinking'  implies the  corrected view
     of  the  moon's  phase,  but  none  of  the  previous  references were
     emended on the manuscript.                                           
  6. This is a convenient  place to  mention a  textual detail.  Gimli says
     that  Dwarf-doors  are  invisible  when  shut,  'and their  own makers
     cannot  find  them  or  open  them,  if  their  secret  is forgotten.'
     Makers  is  certain  (but  could  be  misread),  and  seems altogether
     more  appropriate  and  likely  than masters.  This, appearing  in the
     first typescript of the chapter, was clearly an error,  perpetuated in
     FR (p. 317).                                                         
  7. The  name   ithildin  was   devised  here.   My  father   first  wrote
     starmoon or thilevril (on thilevril see p. 184 and note 12).         
  8. This   has   been   previously   reproduced  by   Humphrey  Carpenter,
     Biography,  facing  p. 179.  - The  writing on  the arch,  but nothing
     more, appears in the original version of the chapter, VI.450.        
  9. The  trees  in  the  design  reproduced  on  p.  182  are of  a highly
     stylized form seen frequently  in my  father's pictures  (for example,
     the  tree  in the  drawing of  Lake-town in  The Hobbit).  These trees
     might  be  further  formalized  into  geometrical  shapes,   or  their
     surfaces cut into planes (so that they appear  like rocks  rising from
     trunks).  The  tree  pencilled  in  above  the  arch,   with  distinct
     branches,  single large  leaves, and  a crescent  moon as  its topmost
     growth, was the  model for  a second  version of  the design  (also at
     Marquette  University),  which  differs  from  the  first only  in the
     form of the trees. It may be that it  was to  this that  the corrected
     text  in  the  manuscript  refers, since  the trees  are said  to bear
     crecent  moons.  In  a  third  version (in  the Bodleian  Library) the
     trees, much  larger, still  bear a  crescent moon  at the  summit, but
     the branches also curl over into crescents (as in  the final  form). A
     fourth  version (also  in the  Bodleian) differs  from the  final form

       only  in  that  the  branches  pass  behind  and  do not  entwine the
       pillars.                                                             
         It can be seen in the narrative passage above the first  version of
       the design that the name  Narvi was  first spelt  Narf[i], as  in the
       original  text (VI.449).  The stroke  through the  first m  of Celeb-
       rimbor  in  the transcription  of the  tengwar at  the bottom  of the
       page  removes  an  erroneous  m;  the   stroke  through   the  second
       removes  a  necessary  m.  -  The second  tengwa in  the penultimate
       word of the  inscription, transliterated  as i-ndiw,  is used  in the
       words  ennyn  and  minno  to  represent  nn,  not  nd. Perhaps  to be
       connected with this is  the form  of the  eighth tengwa  in Celebrim-
       bor, which would naturally be interpreted as mm, not mb.             
  10.  The origin of Gandalf's sword  Glamdring is  still referred  to here,
       as in VI.454, since the passage where it occurs in  FR (p.  293), the
       account  of  the  arms  borne  by  the  members  of the  Company, had
       not yet been added to the previous chapter.                          
  11.  Cf. VI.466, note 36.                                                 
  12.  Thilevril  was  thus  a  rejected possibility  for both  ithildin and
       mithril (see note 7).                                                
  13.  Another draft puts this slightly more fully: 'They give it in tribute
       to  Sauron,  who has  long been  gathering and  hoarding all  that he
       can find. It is not known why: not  for beauty,  but for  some secret
       purpose in the making of weapons of war.'                            
  14.  This is the point (at least in terms of actual  record) at  which the
       connection   was   made   between   mithril  or   'Moria-silver'  and
       Bilbo's mailcoat, ultimately leading to an alteration in the  text of
       The  Hobbit,  Chapter  XIII:  see  VI.465  -  6,  notes  35,  38. The
       mailcoat will no longer be called 'elf-mail' (see p. 173, note 13).
  15.  A final draft for this passage ends illegibly: 'The dwarves  will not
       say  what  happened;  but  mithril   is  rich   only  far   down  and
       northward  towards  the  roots  of  Caradras,  and  some...  [?think]
       they disturbed some [?guarding]'. -  Caradras is  spelt thus  also in
       the text  of the  passage in  the completed  manuscript; see  p. 174,
       note 18.                                                             
  16.  In the fifth version of 'The Council of Elrond'  (p. 142)  Gloin says
       that   the  Dwarves   of  Moria   'delved  immeasurably   deep',  and
       'under the foundations  of the  hills things  long buried  were waked
       at last from sleep'.                                                 
         In  FR  there  seems  to  be  some  ambiguity  on  the  question of
       what  Gandalf  knew.  He  says  that  the  Dwarves fled  from Durin's
       Bane;   but   when  the   Balrog  appeared,   and  Gimli   cried  out
       'Durin's  Bane!',  he  muttered:  'A   Balrog!  Now   I  understand.'
       (These words, like Gimli's cry, are  lacking in  the versions  of the
       scene  from this  time, pp.  197, 202  - 3).  What did  Gandalf mean?
       That  he  understood  now  that  the  being  that  had   entered  the
       Chamber  of   Mazarbul  and   striven  with   him  for   the  mastery

           
                                                                     
 through  the  closed  door  was a  Balrog? Or  that he  understood at
 last  what  it  was  that  had  destroyed  Durin?  Perhaps  he  meant
 both;  for  if  he  had  known what  Durin's Bane  was, would  he not
 have  surmised,  with  horror,  what  was  on the  other side  of the
 door? - 'I have never felt such a challenge', 'I  have met  my match,
 and have nearly been destroyed.'                                     
17. The blue paper is from the cover of  one of  the booklets  of the
  'August 1940' examination script,  which my  father was  still using
  for  drafting.  The  strip  was  pasted  onto  the  manuscript page,
  covering an earlier form of the Runic inscription; for this  see the
  Appendix on Runes, p. 457.                                          

                                     X.                                   
                          THE MINES OF MORIA (2):                        
                                THE BRIDGE.                              
                                                                        
 We  come  at last  to the  point where  my father  took up  the narrative
 again  beside  Balin's  tomb  in  Moria. A  sketch for  the fight  in the
 Chamber  of  Mazarbul  was  in  existence  (VI.443),  going  back  to the
 time when he wrote the original text of 'Moria (i)',  and this  sketch he
 now for the  most part  followed closely.  There was  also a  sketch from
 the  same  time (VI.462)  of Gandalf's  encounter on  the bridge  and his
 fall, when his opponent was to be a Black Rider.                        
  The   new   chapter,  numbered   XVII,  was   entitled  'The   Mines  of
 Moria (ii)', and  corresponds to  Book II  Chapter 5  in FR,  'The Bridge
 of  Khazad-dum'.  The  original  manuscript  is in  pencil, ink,  and ink
 over  pencil,  and  was  written  on the  same 'August  1940' examination
 script as was used for so much of the preceding work. It is a  very rough
 draft indeed: parts of it would be quite beyond the limits  of legibility
 were it not for clues provided by later texts. Some very  minor editorial
 alteration is made here  in respect  of punctuation  and the  breaking of
 sentences, increasing the readability and  comprehensibility of  the text
 though disguising the furious haste in which it was written.            
  That  this  manuscript  followed  the  new  text   of  'The   Ring  Goes
 South' is seen at once  from the  occurrence of  the name  Blackroot (the
 later  Silverlode)  in  the  Book  of  Mazarbul;  for  Blackroot replaced
 Redway as that  text was  being written  (p. 166).  For evidence  that it
 followed the second version of 'Moria (i)' see note 3.                  
  Two notes are written  at the  head of  the first  page: '2  West Gates'
 (see note 3), and 'No dates in Book'.                                   
                                                                        
                          THE MINES OF MORIA (ii).                        
                                                                        
  The   Company  of   the  Ring   stood  some   time  in   silence  beside
 the  tomb  of  Balin.  Frodo   thought  of   Bilbo  and   his  friendship
 with the dwarf, and Balin's visit to Bilbo long ago.                    
  After  a  while  they  looked  about   the  chamber   to  see   if  they
 could  discover  any  tidings  or  signs  of  Balin's  people.  There was
 another  door  on  the  other  side,  under  the  shaft.  By  both  doors
 they   now   saw  that   in  the   dust  were   lying  many   bones,  and
 among   them   broken   swords,   and   axe-heads,  cloven   shields  and

 helms.   Some   of   the  swords   were  crooked:   orc-weapons  with
 black blades.                                                       
   There  were  recesses  and  shelves cut  in the  wall, and  in them
 were  large  iron-bound  chests:  all  had   been  broken   open  and
 plundered;  but  beside  the  broken  lid  of  one  lay  the tattered
 fragments  of  a  book.   It  had   been  hewn   with  a   sword  and
 stabbed,  and  was so  stained with  dark marks  like old  blood that
 only little of it could be read. It only a cover [sic](1) and  much was
 missing or in small  pieces. Gandalf  laid it  carefully on  the slab
 and pored over it; it was written  in dwarvish  and elvish  script by
 many different hands.                                               
   'It is a record of the fortunes of Balin's folk,' said  the wizard,
 'and  seems  to  begin  with  their  coming  to  the  Great  Gate  20
 years ago. Listen!                                                  
   'We  drove  out  Orcs  from  ...  first  hall.  We slew  many under
 the  bright  sun  in  the  Dale.  Floi  was  killed  by an  arrow. He
 slew...  We  have  occupied  [>  taken]  the  Twenty-first  Hall  of
 North-end  [added:  to  dwell  in].  There is  there ...  shaft is...
 Balin  has  set up  his seat  in the  Chamber of  Mazarbul... gold...
 Durin's   axe.   Balin   is   Lord   of   Moria...  We   found  true-
 silver...   Well-forged...   (To)morrow  Oin   is...  seek   [>  Oin
 to  seek]  for the  upper armouries  and treasury  of the  Third Deep
 ... mithril.                                                        
   'There  are  one  or   two  more   rather  ill-written   and  much-
 damaged  pages  of   that  sort.   Then  there   must  be   a  number
 missing,  and  some  I  cannot  read. Let  me see.  No, it  is burned
 and  cut  and  stained.  I  can't read  that. Wait!  Ah, here  is one
 more  recent,  well-written.  Fifth year  of their  colony. Look  - a
 large hasty hand and using elvish character!                        
   'Balin  Lord  of  Moria  fell  in  Dimrill Dale.  He went  alone to
 look  in  Mirror-mere.  an  orc  shot  him  from  behind a  stone. We
 slew  the  orc,  but  many...  up  from  East  up   Blackroot...  Now
 two  lines  are  gone. We  have barred  the Gates.  No more  is clear
 on  that  page.  What is  this? The  last written  page -  rest seems
 blank  [>  stuck  to the  cover]. We  cannot get  out. We  cannot get
 out.  The  Pool  is  up  to  the  Wall  in the  West. There  lies the
 Watcher in the Water. It took Oin. We cannot get out.               
   'They  have  taken  the  Gates.  Frar  and   Loni  and   Nali (2) fell
 there... noise  in the  Deeps. Poor  things. They  could not  get out
 by  either  Gate.  It  was  perhaps well  for us  that the  water had
 sunk  somewhat,  and  that  the  Watcher  was  guarding   the  Dwarf-
 door  not  the  Elfdoor  we  came  by.(3) The last   thing  written,'

 said Gandalf, 'is a hasty scrawl in elf-letters. They are coming.'
   He  looked  round.  'They  seem  to  have  made  a  last   stand  by
 both  the  doors  of  this  chamber,'  he  said.  'But there  were not
 many left by  that time.  So ended  the attempt  to re-take  Moria. It
 was  brave  but  foolish. The  time is  not yet.  Their end  must have
 been  desperate. But  I fear  we must  now say  farewell to  Balin son
 of Fundin: he  was a  noble dwarf.  Here may  he lie  in the  halls of
 his fathers. We will take  this book,  and look  at it  more carefully
 later. You had better keep it, Frodo, and  give it  to Bilbo.  It will
 interest  him  though  I  fear  it  will  grieve him.(4) I think  I know
 where  we  are  now.  This  must  be  the  Chamber  of   Mazarbul  and
 that  hall the  21st Hall  of the  North-end. Then  we ought  to leave
 either by the south or the east arch in the hall, or possibly  by this
 other  eastward  door  here.  I  think  we  will  return to  the Hall.
 Come, let us go! The morning is passing.'                            
                                                                     
   At  that  very  moment  there  was  a great  sound, a  great rolling
 boom  that  seemed  to  come  from  far  below and  to tremble  in the
 stone at their feet. They sprang  to the  door in  alarm. But  even as
 they  did  so  there  was  an echoing  blast; a  great horn  was being
 blown  in  the  hall,  and  answering  horns  and  harsh   cries  were
 heard in the corridors; there was a hurrying sound of many feet.     
   'Fool  that  I have  been!' cried  Gandalf, 'to  delay here.  We are
 nicely trapped just  as they  were before.  But I  was not  here then:
 we will see what - '                                                 
   Boom came the shuddering noise again, and the walls shook.         
   'Slam  the  doors  and  wedge  them!'  shouted  Trotter.  'And  keep
 your packs on: we may get a chance to cut a way out.'                
   'No!'  said  Gandalf.  'Wedge  them  but  keep  them  just  ajar. We
 must  not  get  shut in.  We'll go  by the  further door  if we  get a
 chance.'                                                             
   There  was  another   harsh  horn-call   and  shrill   cries  coming
 down  the  corridor.  There  was  a  ring and  clatter as  the Company
 drew  their  weapons.  [Added:  Glamdring   and  Sting   were  shining
 with  whitish  flames,   glinting  at   the  edges.]   Boromir  thrust
 wedges  of  broken  blades  and  splinters   of  wooden   chest  under
 the  bottom  of  the  western   door  by   which  they   had  entered.
 Then  Gandalf  went  and  stood   behind  it.   'Who  comes   here  to
 disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria?' he cried in a loud voice.
   There was a rush  of hoarse  laughter like  the fall  of a  slide of
 stones  into  a  pit,  but  amid  the  clamour  there  was   one  deep
 voice.  Boom  boom  boom  went  the  noises   in  the   deep.  Swiftly

 Gandalf went to  the opening  and thrust  forward his  staff. There
 was  a  blinding  flash  that  lit  the  chamber  and  the  passage
 beyond.  For  an  instant  Gandalf  looked  out. Arrows  whined and
 whistled down the corridor as he sprang back.                     
   'There  are  goblins:  very many  of them,'  he said.  'Evil they
 look  and  large:  black  Orcs.(5) They  are  for the  moment hanging
 back, but there is something else there. A troll, I think,  or more
 than one. There is no hope of escape that way.'                   
   'And no hope at  all if  they come  at the  other door  as well,'
 said Boromir.                                                     
   'But  there  is  no  sound  outside,'   said  Trotter,   who  was
 standing  by  the  eastern  entrance  listening. 'The  passage here
 goes down steps: it [?prob(ably)] does not give on  to the  hall at
 all.  Our only  chance is  to gather  here. Do  what damage  we can
 to the attackers and then fly down  these steps.  If only  we could
 block the door as we went: but they both open inwards.'           
   Heavy  feet  were  heard  in  the  corridor.  Boromir  kicked the
 wedges  away  from   the  west   door  and   heaved it to.(6) They
 retreated  toward  the still  open eastern  door, first  Pippin and
 Merry,  then  Legolas,  then  Frodo  with  Sam  at  his  side, then
 Boromir,  Trotter,  and  last Gandalf.  But they  had no  chance to
 fly yet. There was a heavy blow at the door,  and it  quivered; and
 immediately  it  began  to  move  inwards  grinding  at  the wedges
 and  thrusting  them  back.  An  enormous  arm  and  shoulder  with
 dark  green  scaly  skin  (or  clad in  some horrible  mesh) thrust
 through  the  widening  gap.  Then  a  great  three-toed  foot  was
 thrust in also. There was dead silence outside.                   
   Boromir  leaped  forward  and  hewed  the  arm  with  his  sword (7)
 but it glanced aside and fell from his shaken  hand: the  blade was
 notched.                                                          
   Frodo  suddenly,  and  very  unexpectedly,  felt  a  great  wrath
 leap up in his heart. 'The Shire,' he cried,  and ran  forward with
 Sting stabbing  at the  hideous foot.  There was  a bellow  and the
 foot  jerked  back,  nearly  wrenching  the  blade  from  his hand:
 drops dripped from it and smoked on the stone.                    
   'One  for  the  Shire!'  cried Trotter  delightedly. 'You  have a
 good blade, Frodo son of  Drogo.' Sam  looked as  if for  the first
 time  he  really  liked  Trotter.  There  was  a crash  and another
 crash:  rocks  were  being  heaved with  huge strength  against the
 door.  It  staggered  back  and  the  opening widened.  Arrows came
 whistling in, but struck  the north  wall and  fell to  the ground.
 The  horns  rang  again, there  was a  rush of  feet, and  orcs one

 after  another  leaped  in.  Then  Legolas loosed  his bow.  Two fell
 pierced  through  the  throat.  The  sword  of  Elendil  struck  down
 others.(8) Boromir  laid  about  him  and  the  orcs  [?   feared]  his
 sword.  One  that  dived  under  his arm  was cloven  ... by  Gimli s
 axe.  Thirteen  orcs  they  slew  and  the others  fled. 'Now  is the
 time if ever,' said [Trotter o] Gandalf, ' - before  that Troll-chief
 or more of them return. Let us go! '                                
   But  even  as  they retreated  once more  a huge  orc-chief, almost
 man-high,  clad  in  black  mail  from head  to foot,  leaped through
 the  door.  Behind  him  but  not  yet daring  to advance  stood many
 followers.  His  eyes were  like coals  of fire.  He wielded  a great
 spear.  Boromir who  was at  the rear  turned, but  with a  thrust of
 his  shield  the  orc  put aside  his stroke  and with  huge strength
 bore  him  back  and  flung  him  down. Then  leaping with  the speed
 of  a  snake  he  charged  and  smote  with  his  spear  straight  at
 Frodo.  The  blow  caught  him on  the right  side. Frodo  was hurled
 against  the  wall  and pinned.  Sam with  a cry  hewed at  the spear
 and  it  broke....  but  even  as the  orc cast  the shaft  aside and
 drew  his  scimitar  the  sword  of  Elendil  drove  down   upon  his
 helm.  There was  a flash  like flame  and the  helm burst.  The orc-
 chieftain  fell  with  cloven  head.  His followers  who were  ... by
 the  now  nearly  open  door  yelled  and   fled  in   dismay.  Boom,
 boom  went  the  noises  in  the  Deep.  The  great voice  rolled out
 again.                                                              
   'Now!'  said  Gandalf.  'Now  is  the  last  chance!' He  picked up
 Frodo  and  sprang  through  the  eastern   door.  The   others  fol-
 lowed.  Trotter  the last  to leave  pulled the  door behind  him. It
 had a great iron ring on either side, but no lock to be seen.       
   'I am all right,' gasped Frodo. 'Put me down!'                   
   Gandalf nearly dropped him in amazement.                          
                                                                    
 Without striking out this last passage my father at  once went  on to
 rewrite it:                                                         
                                                                    
   'Now!'   cried  Gandalf.   'Now  is   the  last   chance!'  Trotter
 picked  up  Frodo  and  sprang  through  the  eastern  door.  Even in
 the  heat  of  battle  Gimli  bowed to  Balin's tomb.  Boromir heaved
 the door to: it had a great iron ring on  each side  but the  key was
 gone and the lock broken.                                           
   'I am all right,' gasped Frodo. 'Put me down!'                   
   Trotter   nearly  dropped   him  in   amazement.  'I   thought  you
 were dead,' he  cried. 'Not  yet,' said  Gandalf turning  round. 'But
 there  is  no  time  [struck out:  to count  (sc. wounds)].(9) Get away

 down  these   stairs,  and   look  out!   Wait  a   moment  for   me  and
 then run: bear right and south.'                                         
   As  they  went  down  the  dark   stairs  they   saw  the   pale  light
 gleam  from  the   wizard's  staff.   He  was   still  standing   by  the
 closed  door.  Frodo  leaning  on   Sam  halted   a  moment   and  peered
 back.  Gandalf  seemed  to be  thrusting the  tip of  his staff  into the
 ancient keyhole.                                                         
   Suddenly  there  was  a   flash  more   dazzling...  [than]   any  that
 they   had   ever   conceived   of.   They  all   turned.  There   was  a
 deafening   crash.   The  swords   in  their   hands  leaped   and  wren-
 ched  in their  fingers, and  they stumbled  and fell  to their  knees as
 the  great  blast  passed  down  the  stairway.  Into  the midst  of them
 fell Gandalf.                                                            
   'Well,  that's  that,' he  said. 'It  was all  I could  do. I  expect I
 have  buried  Balin.  But  alas  for  my staff:  we shall  have to  go by
 guess in the dark. Gimli and I will lead.'                               
   They  followed   in  amazement,   and  as   they  stumbled   behind  he
 gasped  out  some  information.  'I  have  lost  my  staff,  part  of  my
 beard,  and  an  inch  of  eyebrows,' he  said. 'But  I have  blasted the
 door  and  felled  the   roof  against   it,  and   if  the   Chamber  of
 Mazarbul  is  not  a  heap  of  ruins  behind  it, then  I am  no wizard.
 All  the  power  of  my  staff  was  expended  [?in  a  flash]:   it  was
 shattered to bits.'                                                      
                                                                         
   Here the text in ink stops for the  moment. My  father at  once heavily
 rewrote the passage beginning 'Suddenly there was  a flash...'  in pencil
 and  then  continued  on in  pencil from  the point  he had  reached (cf.
 note 4). There is of course no question  that the  story was  coming into
 being in these pages, and the handwriting is so fast as to be practically
 a  code,  while  words  are  missed  out or  misrepresented, so  that one
 must try to puzzle  out not  merely what  my father  did write,  but what
 he intended.                                                             
                                                                         
   Suddenly  they  heard   him  cry   out  strange   words  in   tones  of
 thunder,  and  there  was  a  flash  more  dazzling...  [than]  any  that
 they  had  ever  conceived of:  it was  as if  lightning had  passed just
 before  their  eyes  and  seared   them.  The   swords  in   their  hands
 leapt  and  wrenched  in  their  fingers.  There  was a  deafening crash,
 and  they  fell  or  stumbled to  their knees  as a  rush of  wind passed
 down the stairway. Into the midst of them fell Gandalf.                  
   'Well,  that's  that,'  he  said.  'I  have buried  poor old  Balin. It
 was  all  I could  do. I  nearly killed  myself. [Struck  out as  soon as
 written:   It  will   take  me   years  to   recover  my   strength  and

 wizardry.] Go on, go on! Gimli, come in front with me. We                       
 must go in the dark. Haste now!'                                                
   They followed in amazement feeling the walls, and as they                     
 stumbled behind him he gasped out some information. 'I have                     
 lost part of my beard and an inch of my eyebrows', he said. 'But                
 I have blasted the door and felled the roof against it, and if the              
 Chamber of Mazarbul is not a heap of ruins behind it, then I am                 
 no wizard. But I have expended all my strength for the moment.                  
 I can give you no more light.'                                                  
   The echoes of Gandalf's blast seemed to run to and fro,... ing                
 in the hollow places of stone above them. From behind they                      
 heard boom, boom, like the beating and throbbing of a drum. j                   
 But there was no sound of feet. For an hour they [?hurried on                   
 guided by Gandalf's nose]; and still there was no sound of                      
 pursuit. Almost they began to hope that they would escape.                      
   'But what about you, Frodo?' asked Gandalf, as they halted                    
 to take a gasping breath. 'That is really important.'                           
   'I am bruised and in pain, but I am whole,' said Frodo, 'if that              
 is what you mean.'                                                              
   'I do indeed,' said Gandalf. 'I thought it was a heroic but dead              
 hobbit that Aragorn picked up.'                                                 
   '... it seems that hobbits or this hobbit is made of a stuff so               
 tough that I have never met the like,' said Trotter. 'Had I known               
 I would have spoken softer in the Inn at Bree. That spear thrust                
 would have pierced through a boar.'                                             
   'Well, it has not pierced through me,' said Frodo, 'though I                  
 feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and anvil.' He                    
 said no more. His breath was difficult, and he thought explana-                 
 tions could wait.                                                               
                                                                                
   From  this  point  ('They  now  went on  again', FR  p. 342)  the original
 text is very largely  lost for  some distance,  because my  father overwrote
 it (and largely erased it first) as part of a revised version, but something
 can be read at the end of this section:                                         
                                                                                
   There  was  no  time  to lose.  Away beyond  the pillars  in the              
 deep [? gloom] at the west end of the hall to the right there came              
 cries and  horn calls.  And far  off again  they heard  boom, boom              
 and the ground trembled [? to  the dreadful  drum taps].  'Now for              
 the last race!' said Gandalf. 'Follow me!'                                    
                                                                                
   The  remainder  of the  original text  is in  ink and  is at  first fairly
 legible,  but  towards  the end  becomes in  places impossible  to decipher,

 being written at great speed,  with small  words indicated  by mere
 marks, word-endings omitted, and scarcely any punctuation.         
                                                                   
   He turned to the left and darted across the floor of the hall. It
 was  longer  than  it  looked. As  they ran  they heard  behind the
 beat and echo of many  feet running  on the  floor.(10) A shrill yell
 went up: they had been seen. There was a ring  and clash  of steel:
 an arrow whistled over Frodo's head.                               
   Trotter laughed. 'They did not expect this,'  he said.  'The fire
 has cut them off for the moment. We are on the wrong side!'        
   'Look out for the bridge!' cried Gandalf  over his  shoulder. 'It
 is dangerous and narrow.'                                          
   Suddenly  Frodo  saw  before him  a black  gulf. Just  before the
 end of the hall the floor vanished and fell into an abyss. The exit
 door  could  not be  reached save  by a  narrow railless  bridge of
 stone that spanned the  chasm with  a single  curving leap  of some
 fifty feet. Across it  they could  only pass  in single  file. They
 reached the chasm  in a  pack and  halted at  the bridge-end  for a
 moment.  More  arrows   whistled  over   them.  One   pierced  Gan-
 dalf's  hat  and  stuck  there  like a  black feather.  They looked
 back.  Away  beyond  the  fiery  fissure  Frodo  saw  the  swarming
 black  figures  of  many  orcs. They  brandished spears  and scimi-
 tars  which  shone  red  as  blood.  Boom,  boom  rolled  the drum-
 beats  now  advancing  louder   and  louder   and  more   and  more
 menacing.  Two  great  dark  troll-figures  could be  seen [?tower-
 ing] among the orcs. They strode forward to the fiery brink.       
   Legolas bent  his bow.  Then he  let it  fall. He  gave a  cry of
 dismay  and  terror.  Two  great  dark  troll-shapes  had appeared;
 but  it  was  not  these that  caused his  cry.(11) The  orc-ranks had
 opened as if they themselves were  afraid. A  figure strode  to the
 fissure, no more than man-high yet terror seemed  to go  before it.
 They could see the furnace-fire of its yellow  eyes from  afar; its
 arms were very long; it had a  red [?tongue].  Through the  air it
 sprang over the fiery fissure. The flames leaped up to greet it and
 wreathed  about it.  Its streaming  hair seemed  to catch fire, and
 the sword that it held turned to flame. In its other hand it held a
 whip of many thongs.                                               
   'Ai,  ai,'  wailed  Legolas.  '[The  Balrogs are  >] A  Balrog is
 come.'                                                             
   'A  Balrog,'  said  Gandalf. 'What  evil fortune  - and  my power
 is nearly spent.'                                                  
   The fiery figure ran across the floor. The  orcs yelled  and shot
 many arrows.                                                       

   'Over  the  Bridge,'  cried Gandalf.  'Go on!  Go on!  This is  a foe
 beyond any of you. I will hold the Bridge. Go on!'                   
   When   they  gained   the  door   they  turned,   in  spite   of  his
 command.  The  troll-figures  strode  across  the  fire  carrying  orcs
 across.  The  Balrog  rushed  to  the  Bridge-foot.  Legolas  [?raised]
 his  bow,  and  [an]  arrow   pierced  his   shoulder.  The   bow  fell
 useless.  Gandalf  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  bridge. In  his hand
 Glamdring  gleamed.  In  his  left  he  held up  his staff.  The Balrog
 advanced and stood gazing at him.                                     
   Suddenly  with  a  spout  of  flame  it  sprang  on  the  Bridge, but
 Gandalf  stood  firm.  'You  cannot  pass,' he  said. 'Go  back [struck
 out  probably  as  soon  as  written:  into  the  fiery  depths.  It is
 forbidden  for  any  Balrog  to  come  beneath  the  sky  since  Fionwe
 son   of  Manwe   overthrew   Thangorodrim].  I   am  the   master  of
 the   White  Fire.   The  red   flame  cannot   come  this   way.'  The
 creature  made  no  reply,  but  standing  up  tall  so that  it loomed
 above  the  wizard  it  strode  forward  and  smote  him.  A  sheet  of
 white  flame  sprang  before  him  [?like  a  shield],  and  the Balrog
 fell  backward,  its  sword  shivered  into  molten  pieces  and  flew,
 but  Gandalf's  staff  snapped  and   fell  from   his  hand.   With  a
 gasping  hiss  the Balrog  sprang up;  it seemed  to be  [?half blind],
 but  it  came  on  and  grasped  at  the  wizard.  Glamdring  shore off
 its  empty  right  hand,  but  in  that instant  as he  [?delivered the
 stroke]  the  Balrog  [?struck  with]  its  whip.  The   thongs  lashed
 round the wizard's knees and he staggered.                            
   Seizing  Legolas'  bow  Gimli   shot,  [but]   the  arrow   fell  ...
 Trotter  sprang  back  along  the bridge  with his  sword. But  at that
 moment  a  great  troll  came  up  from  the other  side and  leaped on
 the  bridge.  There  was  a terrible  crack and  the bridge  broke. All
 the western end fell. With a terrible cry the troll fell after  it, and
 the  Balrog  [?tumbled]  sideways  with  a  yell  and  fell   into  the
 chasm.  Before  Trotter  could  reach  the  wizard  the   bridge  broke
 before  his  feet,  and  with  a  great  cry  Gandalf  fell   into  the
 darkness.(12)                                                         
   Trotter  [?recoiled].  The  others  were   rooted  with   horror.  He
 recalled  them.  'At  least  we can  obey his  last command,'  he said.
 They  [?passed]  by  the  door  and  stumbled   wildly  up   the  great
 stair   beyond,  and   beyond  [?   up  there]   was  a   wide  echoing
 passage.  They  stumbled  along  it.  Frodo  heard  Sam  at   his  side
 weeping  as  he  ran,  and  then  he  [?  realized]  that  he  too  was
 weeping. Boom, boom, boom rang the echo of... behind them.            
   On  they  ran.  The  light  grew.  It  shone  through  great  shafts.

 They passed into a wide hall, clear-lit with high windows in the          
 east. [?Through  that] they  ran, and  suddenly before  them the          
 Great Gates with carven posts and mighty doors - cast back.               
   There were orcs at the door, but amazed to see that it was not          
 friends that ran they fled in  dismay, and  the Company  took no          
 heed of them.                                                             
                                                                          
   The original draft of the chapter ends  here, and  does not  recount the
 coming  of  the  Company  into  Dimrill  Dale. There  is a  pencilled note
 written on the manuscript against  the description  of the  Balrog: 'Alter
 description  of  Balrog.  It seemed  to be  of man's  shape, but  its form
 could not be plainly discerned. It felt larger than it looked.'  After the
 words  'Through  the  air  it  sprang  over the  fiery fissure'  my father
 added: 'and a great  shadow seemed  to black  out the  light.' And  at the
 end of the text - before he had finished it, for the concluding passage is
 written  around the  words -  he wrote:  'No -  Gandalf breaks  the bridge
 and Balrog falls - but lassoos him.'                                      
                                                                          
   It will be seen that for much of its length this chapter was  very fully
 formed  from  its  first  emergence;  while  scarcely a  sentence remained
 unchanged  into  FR,  and  while many  details of  speech and  event would
 be altered, there really was not very far to go.  But in  certain passages
 this earliest draft underwent substantial development in the narrative.
   The first of  these is  the account  of Gandalf's  blocking of  the east
 door  out  of  the  Chamber  of  Mazarbul (FR  pp. 340  - 1),  where there
 was as yet no suggestion that  some greater  power than  any orc  or troll
 had  entered  the  chamber,  and  where  the  blasting  of  the  door  and
 felling of the roof was  not caused  by competing  spells of  great power,
 but  was  a  deliberate  act  on  Gandalf's part  to preserve  the Company
 . from pursuit down the stair.                                            
   It cannot be said precisely how the story stood in the lost  passage (p.
 196),  though from  a word  still decipherable  here and  there it  can be
 seen that  Gimli saw  a red  light ahead  of them,  and that  Gandalf told
 them  that  they  had  reached  the First  Deep below  the Gates  and were
 come  to  the  Second  Hall. Clearly  then the  essential elements  of the
 final narrative were already present.                                     
   The  second  passage  in   which  the   original  draft   would  undergo
 major development is the narrative of  the final  attack on  the fugitives
 and the  battle on  the Bridge  of Khazad  - dum  (FR pp.  343 -  5). That
 there was a  bridge in  Moria, that  Gandalf would  hold it  alone against
 a  single  adversary  of great  power, and  that both  would fall  into an
 abyss  when  the  bridge  broke  beneath  them, had  been foreseen  in the
 original  sketch  (VI.462); but  the final  form of  the famous  scene was
 not achieved at a stroke. Here,  the trolls  do not  bring great  slabs to
 serve as gangways over the fiery fissure,  but carry  orcs across  (it may
 be  noted  incidentally  that  'orcs',  rather  than   'goblins',  becomes

  pervasive in  this text:  see note  5); the  form of  the Balrog  is clearly
  perceived; there is no blast of Boromir's  horn; Legolas  is pierced  in the
  shoulder  by  an  arrow   as  he   attempts  to   shoot;  and   Aragorn  and
  Boromir  do  not  remain  with  Gandalf  at  the  end  of  the  bridge.  The
  physical  contest  between  Gandalf  and  the  Balrog  is  differently  con-
  ceived:  Gandalf's  staff  breaks  at  the  moment  when the  Balrog's sword
  shivers into  molten fragments  in the  'sheet of  white flame',  and though
  the whip catches Gandalf round his knees it is  not the  cause of  his fall.
  Here, it is the great troll leaping onto the bridge that causes it to break,
  carrying with  it troll,  Balrog, and  wizard together.  But even  before he
  had finished the initial draft  of the  chapter my  father saw  'what really
  happened':  'Gandalf  breaks  the  bridge  and  the   Balrog  falls   -  but
  lassoos  him'.  He  thereupon  moved  the  'sheet  of  white flame'  and the
  snapping  of  Gandalf's  staff  from  the initial  clash between  the adver-
  saries to the point where Gandalf broke the bridge.                         
                                                                             
    It is clear that my father turned at  once to  the making  of a  fair copy
  of the original draft text - that he did so at  once, before  continuing the
  story,  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  Sam's  wound in  the affray  in the
  Chamber  of  Mazarbul  only  appears  in  the  new  version  but  is present
  at the beginning of 'Lothlorien'.                                           
    The  new  version   (a  good   clear  manuscript   in  ink,   with  little
  hesitation  in  the  course  of  composition  and  without  a great  deal of
  subsequent  pencilled  alteration)  was  still called  'The Mines  of Moria,
 . 2'; a subtitle was added  in pencil,  'The Bridge'.  For some  distance the
 text proceeds as  a characteristic  polishing and  slight elaboration  of the
 draft, bringing it very close  to FR,  which I  take here  as the  basis with
 which the present text is compared.                                          
    The  Book  of  Mazarbul  is  not  described  as  'partly burned',  and its
 pages  are  said  to  have  been  written  'in  both  dwarf-runes  and elvish
 script',  where  in  FR  a  distinction is  made between  the runes  of Moria
 and of Dale.  The text  of the first page  that Gandalf  read out  runs thus:
                                                                             
 'We drove out  Orcs... from  guard something  and first  hall. We             
 slew many under the bright sun in the Dale.  Floi was  killed by             
 an arrow. He slew... then I can only read  stray words  for many             
 lines.  Then  comes  We  have  taken  the  Twenty-first Hall  of             
 North-end to dwell in. There is ... I cannot read what: a shaft             
 is mentioned. Then Balin has set up his seat  in the  Chamber of             
 Mazarbul.'                                                                   
   'The Chamber of Records,' said Gimli. 'I  guess that  is where             
 we now stand.'                                                               
   'Well, I can  read no  more for  a long  way, except  the word             
 gold, ' said Gandalf; 'and, yes, Durin's axe and something helm.             
 Then Balin is Lord  of Moria.  After some  stars there  comes We             
 found  true-silver and  later the  word well-forged;  then some-             

                                                         
                                                                            
 thing, I have it! Oin to  seek for  the upper  armouries and                
 treasury of the Third Deep and... but I can make out no more                
 on the page but mithril, west, and Balin.'                                  
                                                                            
 This  text  corresponds  almost  exactly to  the third  drawing of  the page
 (see the Appendix, p. 459).                                                 
  The  text  of  the  second page  that Gandalf  read out,  in 'a  large bold
 hand  writing  in  elvish  script',  now  identified  by  Gimli   as  Ori's,
 scarcely  differs  from  the  text  given on  p. 191,  except that  after We
 have   barred   the  Gates   Gandalf  can   doubtfully  read   horrible  and
 suffer:  all  is.  Thus  the  passage  giving  the  date  (10  November)  of
 Balin's death in Dimrill  Dale is  still absent.  The earliest,  or earliest
 extant,  drawing  of  Ori's  page was  done at  the same  time as  the third
 drawing  of  the  first  page  (see  the  Appendix,  p. 459),  and obviously
 accompanies the present version of the narrative.                           
  The  text  of  the  last  page  of  the  book remains  exactly the  same as
 that  given  on  p.  191;  and  the  earliest  extant  drawing (accompanying
 the third of the first page and the first of Ori's page) fits it exactly.
  In   this   version   Gandalf   no   longer  makes   any  mention   of  the
 Watcher  in  the  Water  and the  two Doors,  but Gimli  says: 'It  was well
 for  us  that  the  pool  had  sunk  a  little,  and  that  we  came  to the
 Elven-door  that  was  closed.  The Watcher  was sleeping,  or so  it seems,
 down  at  the  southern  end  of  the  pool.'  The  italicized   words  were
 struck  out,  probably  at  once,  and   so  the   conception  of   the  two
 separate  entrances  into  Moria  from  the  West  was   finally  abandoned.
 Gandalf  still  gives the  Book of  Mazarbul to  Frodo, for  him to  give to
 Bilbo 'if you get a chance.'                                                
  In  his  last  words  before  the  attack  on   the  Chamber   of  Mazarbul
 began  Gandalf  says  that  'the   Twenty-first  Hall   should  be   on  the
 seventh level, that is five above the Gate level' (six in FR). He still says
 'There are goblins... They are evil and  large: black  Orcs', but  the troll
 becomes  'a  great  cave-troll'  as  in  FR,  and  its  three-toed  foot was
 changed  on  the  manuscript  to  a  toeless  foot.(13) Sam  now gets  a wound
 in the  affray, 'a  cut on  the arm',  which as  mentioned above  appears in
 the original draft of 'Lothlorien' ('The cut  in his  arm was  paining him',
 p. 220). A rider to the present text changed this to 'a glancing cut  in his
 shoulder'.  'The  sword  of  Elendil'  still  has  no  other  name, Branding
 being substituted later in pencil (see p. 165, and p. 274 and note 19).     
  In  the  story  of  the  flight  of  the  Company   from  the   Chamber  of
 Mazarbul  the new  version followed  the original  draft fairly  closely. As
 Frodo  and  Sam  peered  up  the  steps  they  heard Gandalf  muttering, and
 the  sound,  they  thought,  of his  staff tapping.  The searing  flash like
 lightning,  the  wrenching of  their swords  in their  hands, and  the great
 rush  of  wind  down  the  stairs forcing  them to  their knees,  were still
 present  (the  blasting  of  the  Chamber remaining  a deliberate  act); and
 Gandalf  still  says  'I  have  lost  part  of my  beard and  an inch  of my

  eyebrows'.  The  long  descent  in  the  dark  down  flights of  stairs now
  enters, Gandalf feeling the ground with his staff 'like  a blind  man'; but
  at  the  words  'Almost they  began to  hope against  hope that  they would
  escape'  (FR  p. 341)  this new  version stops,  and all  this part  of the
  story,  from  the  killing  of  the  orc-chieftain  in  the   Chamber,  was
  rejected.(14)                                                             
    The  development  of  the  chapter  from this  point took  much unravell-
  ing,  but  it  seems clear  that my  father decided  at this  juncture that
  further  drafting  was  required  before  the  fair  copy  on which  he was
  engaged  could  be  continued.  He   therefore  wrote   now  a   new  rough
  draft  carrying  the  story  from  the  flight  of  the  Company  from  the
  Chamber  of  Mazarbul  to  their  final  escape  out  of Moria;  and having
  done  this,  he  returned  to  the  fair copy  and went  on with  it again,
  following the draft quite closely. I believe that  all this  was continuous
  work, that it can be shown that  the story  of the  chapter 'The  Bridge of
  Khazad-dum'  was  brought  almost  to its  final form  before the  story of
  Lothlorien  was  begun  (see  p.  204  and  note 20).  For clarity,  in the
  remainder of this chapter I will call the new draft 'B'  and the  fair copy
  manuscript 'C', the original  draft, which  has been  given in  full, being
  'A'.(15)                                                                    
                                                                           
    This new draft B  for the  latter part  of the  chapter was  written very
  fast, mostly in  soft pencil,  and is  hard to  read, but  for much  of its
  length  the  final  narrative was  now almost  achieved, with  scarcely any
  differences of substance. Gandalf still says 'I nearly killed  myself', and
  he  does  not   say  'I   have  met   my  match,   and  have   nearly  been
  destroyed';  he  knows  'one  or  two  (shutting-spells)  that  will  hold,
  though  they  don't  stop  the  door  being   smashed  if   great  strength
  comes'; and he says that the Orcs  on the  other side  of the  door 'seemed
  to  be  talking their  horrible secret  language, which  I never  knew more
  than  a  word  or  two of.'  In the  fair copy  C these  become: 'I  ran up
  against  something  unexpected  I  haven't  met  before';  'I  know several
  that will hold'; and 'talking their hideous secret language.'             
    The overwriting of  the erased  passage in  the primary  text A  (p. 196)
  forms  a part  of the  new draft,  and the  new text  (from 'They  now went
  on again' to ' "Now for the last race!" cried Gandalf') is so close  to the
  final form in FR (pp. 342 - 3) as to need no commentary.                  
    In the last part of the  chapter (from  'He turned  left and  sped across
  the  smooth  floor of  the hall')  the drafting  of the  new version  is as
  rough  as  was  the  original text  A that  it replaced  in this  part, the
  language  unpolished  and  the  conclusion  scarcely  legible.  The  actual
  narrative of FR pp. 344 - 6 is  present, however,  except in  these points.
  The Balrog when first seen  beyond the  fiery fissure  is described  as 'of
  man-shape  maybe,  and  not  much  larger'  (cf.  pp.  197, 199).  The fair
  copy  C  has  here  likewise  'and  not  much  greater' (FR:  'of man-shape
  maybe,  yet  greater').(16) Gimli's  cry  of  'Durin's  Bane!'  and Gandalf's
  words  'Now  I  understand'  were  still   absent  from   both  B   and  C,

                                                
                                                                          
 Gimli's words (only) being added in pencil  to the  latter; on  this matter
 see pp. 185 - 6 and note 16 to the last chapter.                          
  Following Legolas' cry 'Ai! Ai! A Balrog is come! ' it is  told in  B that
 'he turned to fly  and an  arrow struck  him in  the shoulder.  He stumbled
 and  began  to  crawl  on  all  fours  along  the  Bridge.'  That  an arrow
 pierced Legolas in  the shoulder  is told  in the  original version  of the
 story (p. 198). In B my father struck out the incident, then ticked  it for
 retention;  but  it is  absent from  C. Boromir's  horncall is  absent from
 both texts, though my father added it in pencil to C,  at first  placing it
 after 'A Balrog is come!' but then deciding to put  it in  earlier, before
 'Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string',  so that  it was  the Orcs
 who  were  momentarily  halted  by  the  blast  of  the  horn  and  not the
 Balrog.   In  neither   text  do   Aragorn  and   Boromir  remain   at  the
 bridge-foot, and thus it is said  subsequently that  Trotter 'ran  back out
 to  the  bridge'  and  'ran  out onto  the Bridge',  i.e. from  the doorway
 where he had been standing with the others.                               
  In  B  it  is said  only that  the Balrog  'stood facing  him': in  C 'the
 Balrog  halted  facing  him,  and  the  shadow about  him reached  out like
 great  wings'.(17) Immediately  afterwards,  where  in  FR  the  Balrog drew
 itelf up to a great height, and its wings were spread  from wall  to wall',
 neither  B  nor  C has  the words  'to a  great height'  nor speaks  of the
 'wings'.  Gandalf's  words  to the  Balrog remain  in B  very close  to the
 original draft (p. 198), with 'White Fire' for 'the White Fire'; in  C this
 was  changed  in the  act of  writing: 'You  cannot pass.  I am  the master
 of  White  Flame.  [Neither  Red  Fire  nor  Black  Shadow  can >]  The Red
 Fire cannot come this way. Go back to the Shadow!'                       
                                                                          
  Both  B  and  C  continued  a  little  way  beyond  the  point  where 'The
 Bridge of Khazad -  dum' ends  in FR,  the former  giving first  a descrip-
 tion of Dimrill Dale and Mirrormere, which was omitted in C.              
                                                                          
 Northward  it  ran  up   into  a   glen  of   shadows  between   two  great
 arms   of   the   mountains,   over  which   towered  three   white  peaks.
 Before   them   (west)   [read   east](18) the   mountains   marched   to  a
 sudden  end.   To  their   right  (south)   they  receded   endlessly  into
 the  distance.  Less  than  a  mile  away  (and   below  them   where  they
 stood  on  the  skirts  of  the  mountains)  lay  a  mere  - just  clear of
 the  shadow,  under  the  sunny  sky.  But  its   waters  looked   dark,  a
 deep  blue  such  as  the  night  sky  seen   through  a   lighted  window.
 Its  surface  was  utterly  still.  About  it lay  a smooth  sward, sloping
 swiftly   down   on   all   sides   towards   its   bare   unbroken  brink.
 There  lay   the  Mirror   Mere.  High   on  the   shores  above   stood  a
 rough broken column. Durin's Stone.                                       
                                                                          
 This passage was an  overwriting in  ink, but  the pencilled  text beneath,
 visible  here  and  there,  was  written  continuously  with  what precedes

 (the  Company  looking back  at Moria  Gate), and  is certainly  the most
 original  form of  the description  of Mirrormere.  Against it  my father
 wrote  Not  yet  used.  He  used  it  in  fact in  the original  draft of
 'Lothlorien' (p. 219): a clear demonstration that the new draft B  of the
 latter part of  the present  chapter preceded  work on  'Lothlorien' (see
 note 20).                                                                
   B then continues to its conclusion thus:                               
                                                                         
 'So  we  have  passed  through  Moria,'  said  Trotter  at  last, passing
 his  hand  over  his  eyes.  'I  know  not  what  put  the words  into my
 mouth,  but  did  I  not  say  to  Gandalf:  If  you  pass  the  Gates of
 Moria,   beware!(19) Alas   that   I  should   have  spoken   true.  No
 fortune  could  have been  so ill  as this:  hardly... had  all perished.
 But  now  we  must  do  as  we  can  without  our  friend  and  guide. At
 least  we  may  yet  avenge  him.  Let  us gird  ourselves. It  is better
 for us to strike hard than to mourn long.'                               
                                                                         
 With slightly  altered wording  this was  used as  the conclusion  of the
 chapter in the fair copy C also.(20)                                     
   Throughout  C,  Trotter  (as  he  is  named  at  every  occurrence save
 once  where  Gandalf  names  him)  was   subsequently  changed   to  Elf-
 stone (see pp. 277 - 8).                                                 
                                                                         
                                   NOTES.                                 
                                                                         
  1.   Though the words 'it only a cover' seem  clear, my  father cannot
       have intended 'it only had a cover', as the following text shows.
  2.   A dwarf Frar, companion of Gloin, appeared in the earliest drafts
       of 'The Council  of Elrond'  (VI.397, 412),  where he  was replaced
       by  Burin son  of Balin.  The three  Dwarf-names Frar,  Loni, Nali,
       retained in  FR, were  again taken  from the  Old Norse  Elder Edda
       - whereas Floi (slain in the Dimrill Dale) was not.                
  3.   On  the  conception  of  two  distinct  entrances  to Moria  from the
       West, which goes back  to the  original version  of 'The  Ring Goes
       South', see  p. 178.  The striking  out (probably  at once)  of the
       reference  in  the  previous chapter  (ibid.) to  'The Dwarven-door
       further south' (i.e. south of the Elven-door at the end of the road
       from Hollin) could be taken as an indication that the  present text
       in  fact  preceded the  new version  of 'Moria  (i)'. On  the other
       hand, if this were so, it is hard to see why my father  should have
       put in the direction '2 West Gates' at the beginning of the present
       text (p. 190), seeing that the two  entrances were  already present
       in the oldest version of the story of  Moria. It  seems to  me most
       probable  that he  wrote '2  West Gates'  precisely because  he had
       now changed his mind  again; this  detail being  therefore actually
       evidence that the first writing of 'Moria (ii)' did follow  the new

      version  of  'Moria  (i)'. -  Further, in  the fair  copy text  of the
      present chapter Gimli says (p. 201) that 'it was  well for  us that...
      we  came  to  the  Elven-door  that  was closed',  though this  was at
      once or soon rejected.                                                
  4.  In FR Gandalf entrusted  the book  to Gimli,  to give  to Dain.  - The
      first  page  of  the  manuscript,  which  ends  at  approximately this
      point,  was written  in pencil,  but from  the beginning  of Gandalf's
      reading  from  the  book my  father overwrote  it in  ink -  and then,
      from this point, carried on the initial text in ink. Thus the original
      drafting  of  the  words  and  phrases  which Gandalf  could interpret
      in  the  Book  of  Mazarbul  is  partly obliterated;  but most  of the
      underlying pencil can be made out, and it  can be  seen that  the text
      given  here  (itself  emended)  did  not greatly  differ from  what it
      superseded.                                                           
  5.  My father first wrote here: 'veritable Orcs'. Cf. the  original sketch
      for the chapter given  in VI.443:  'Gandalf says  there are  goblins -
      of very evil kind, larger than  usual, real  orcs', and  my discussion
      of  'goblins'  and  'orcs'  in  VI.437 note  35. In  FR at  this point
      Gandalf  says:  'There  are  Orcs,  very  many of  them. And  some are
      large and evil: black Uruks of Mordor.'                               
  6.  In FR it was  at this  point that  Boromir, closing  the west  door of
      the  chamber,  wedged  it  with  broken  sword-blades   and  splinters
      of wood. It  is odd  that in  the present  text it  is said  here that
      Boromir  kicked  the  wedges  away  from  the door  and heaved  it to,
      and  yet  immediately  afterwards  the  door  'began  to  move inwards
      grinding at the wedges and thrusting them back.'                      
  7.  This  sentence  replaced:  'Gandalf  leaped  forward  and   hewed  the
      arm with Glamdring.'                                                  
  8.  The  reforging  of  the  Sword  of Elendil  has been  told in  the new
      version of 'The Ring Goes South' (p. 165).                            
  9.  In  a  subsequent version  of the  passage Gandalf  says 'There  is no
      time for counting wounds.'                                            
 10.  This sentence was first written: 'As they ran cries  and the  noise of
      many feet entered the far end behind them.'                           
 11   This  passage,  with  the  two  references  to  the appearance  of the
      Trolls,  is  confused.  Though  all  was  written  at  the  same time,
      phrases  were  added  and  rejected  phrases  were left  standing, and
      my father's intention is in places impossible to determine.           
 12.  Written  in the  margin at  the time  of composition:  'Go on...  Do I
      fight in vain? Fly!' Cf.  Trotter's words  'At least  we can  obey his
      last command' in the text immediately following.                      
 13.  The  oddity  of the  original story  (see p.  193 and  note 6)  in the
      matter  of  the  wedging  of  the  western  door  is now  removed, for
      when  Boromir  had  kicked  away  the  wedges  and  heaved  it  to  he
      then  re-wedged  it.  All  the  passages  concerned   were  corrected,
      probably at once, to give the story as it is in FR.                   

 14.  The rejected part  of the  manuscript (a  single sheet  written on
      both  sides)  was  found  among my  father's papers,  the rest  of it
      having gone to Marquette.                                            
 15.  The  sequence  of  development  in  this  chapter  can   be  expressed
      thus:                                                                
        A -> C (C interrupted); B -> C (C continued).                        
 16.  In a pencilled addition in C  to the  scene of  the Balrog's  fall from
      the Bridge my father  changed 'the  stone upon  which it  stood' (the
      text of FR) to 'the stone upon which the vast form stood'.           
 17.  The  second  him  is  Gandalf,  not  only  from  the syntax,  but also
      because the Balrog is always referred to  as it.  FR has  'the shadow
      about it'.                                                           
 18.  See p. 237 note 5.                                                     
 19.  Aragorn's  words  to  Gandalf  If  you  pass   the  doors   of  Moria,
      beware! had entered in 'Moria (i)', p. 178.                          
      20 With this revised wording the passage is found at the beginning of
      the first draft of 'Lothlorien' (p. 219). In the fair  copy C  of the
      present  chapter  my  father  subsequently struck  it out,  and wrote
      at the end of the text that precedes it: End of Chapter. It  is clear
      from  this  that  not  only the  draft B  but also  the fair  copy of
      'The  Mines  of  Moria  (ii):  The  Bridge'  were   completed  before
      'Lothlorien' was begun.                                              

                                    XI.                                   
                       THE STORY FORESEEN FROM MORIA.                     
                                                                         
 At about this time, and still using the reverse pages and blue  covers of
 the  same  invaluable  examination script,  my father  wrote a  much more
 elaborate outline of the story to  come than  any he  had yet  done. When
 this was  written in  relation to  the narrative  that had  been achieved
 cannot  be  precisely  demonstrated,  but  far the  most likely  time, to
 judge from the  beginning of  the outline,  would be  when 'The  Mines of
 Moria  (ii)'  was  at  least  initially  drafted  (and  probably actually
 completed  in  the fair  copy) and  'Lothlorien' was  immediately contem-
 plated; and therefore I give it in this place.                           
   It is particularly  interesting to  observe what  elements in  this new
 plot derive from earlier  sketches, and  how those  ideas had  evolved by
 this time, as the actual writing of the narrative drew nearer. These are:
 (1)  an  isolated  page  which I  have tentatively  dated to  August 1939
 (VI.380);  (2)  a  page  actually  dated  August  1939  (VI.381);  (3) an
 outline set down at the time  of the  first drafting  of 'The  Council of
 Elrond' (VI.410 - 11).                                                   
   The  new  text  was  written  very  quickly  and  roughly,   mostly  in
 pencil, and is in places hard to make out.  I have  expanded contractions
 and made a few other very small editorial clarifications. It will be seen
 that despite its fullness it does not at all represent a clearly defined,
 step-by-step  sequence:  ideas were  emerging and  evolving as  my father
 wrote it.                                                                
                                                                         
                              Sketch of Plot.                             
                                                                         
 Reach   Lothlorien   Dec.   15.(1) Take  refuge   up  Trees.   Elves  be-
 friend   them.  Dec.   15,  16,   17  they   journey  to   Angle  between
 Anduin   and   Blackroot.(2) There   they   remain   long.   (While   they
 are up trees orcs go by - also Gollum.)                                  
   At  Angle  they  debate  what  is  to be  done. Frodo  feels it  is his
 duty  to  go  straight  to  Fire  Mountain.   But  Aragorn   and  Boromir
 wish  to  go  to  Minas  Tirith,  and  if  possible  gather  force. Frodo
 sees  that  that  will  not help.  As Minas  Tirith is  still a  long way
 from  Fire  Mountain   and  Sauron   will  only   be  the   more  warned.
 (Boromir  is  secretly  planning  to  use  the  Ring,  since  Gandalf  is
 gone.)                                                                   

   Boromir takes  Frodo apart  and talks  to him.  Begs to  see Ring
 again. Evil enters into his heart and he tries  to daunt  Frodo and
 then to take it by force. Frodo is obliged to slip it on  to escape
 him.  (What  does  he  see  then  -  cloud  all  round  him getting
 nearer and many fell voices in air?)                              
   Frodo  seeing that  evil has  entered into  the Company  dare not
 stay and  does not  want to  imperil hobbits  or others.  He flies.
 His  loss  is  not discovered  for some  time because  of Boromir's
 lies.  (Boromir  says  he  has climbed  a tree  and will  be coming
 back  soon?)  The  hunt  eventually  fails  because  Frodo  went  a
 long way invisible.                                               
   The search. Sam is lost.  He tries  to track  Frodo and  comes on
 Gollum. He follows Gollum and Gollum leads him to Frodo.          
   Frodo  hears  following  feet. And  flies. But  Sam comes  up too
 to  his  surprise.  The  two  are  too much  for Gollum.  Gollum is
 daunted  by  Frodo  -  who  has  a  power  over him  as Ringbearer.
 (But use of Ring proves bad since it  re-establishes power  of Ring
 over Frodo after his  cure. At  end he  cannot willingly  part with
 it.)                                                              
   Gollum  pleads  for  forgiveness  and  feigns  reform.  They make
 him  lead  them  through  the  Dead  Marshes.  (Green faces  in the
 pools.) Lithlad Plain  of Ash.  The Searching  Eye of  Barad-dur (a
 single light in a high window).                                   
                                                                  
 *  At  point   where  Sam,   Frodo  and   Gollum  meet   return  to
 others - for whose adventures see  later. But  they should  be told
 at this point.                                                    
                                                                  
   The  Gap  of  Gorgoroth  not  far from  Fire Mountain.  There are
 Orc  guard-towers  on  either side  of Gorgoroth.(3) They see  a host
 of evil led by  Black Riders.  Gollum betrays  Frodo. He  is beaten
 off, but escapes shrieking to  the Black  Riders. The  Black Riders
 now  have  taken form  of demonic  eagles and  fly before  host, or
 [? take eagle-like] vulture birds as steeds.                      
   Frodo toils up Mountain to find Crack.                          
   Rumour   of   Battle   had   already   reached  Frodo,   Sam  and
 Gollum. (That is why the host of Mordor was riding out.)          
   While  Frodo  is  toiling  up  Mountain  he  looks back  and sees
 Battle gathering. He hears  faint sound  of horns  in the  hills. A
 great   dust   where   the  Horsemen   are  coming.   Thunder  from
 Baraddur  and  a  black  storm  comes  up  on  an East  wind. Frodo
 wonders  what  is happening  but has  no hope  that he  himself can
 be   saved.   The   Ringwraiths   swoop   back.  They   have  heard
 Gollum's cries.                                                   

   Orodruin   [written   above:   Mount   Doom]   has    three   great
 fissures  North,  West,  South [>  West, South,  East] in  its sides.
 They are very deep  and at  an unguessable  depth a  glow of  fire is
 seen.  Every  now  and  again  fire  rolls  out  of  mountain's heart
 down  the  terrific channels.  The   mountain  towers   above  Frodo.
 He  comes  to a  flat place  on the  mountain-side where  the fissure
 is full of fire - Sauron's well of fire. The Vultures are  coming. He
 cannot  throw  Ring in.  The Vultures  are coming.  All goes  dark in
 his  eyes and  he falls  to his  knees. At  that moment  Gollum comes
 up and wrestles with him, and takes Ring. Frodo falls flat.         
   Here  perhaps  Sam  comes  up,  beats  off  a  vulture   and  hurls
 himself and Gollum into the gulf?                                   
   Function  for Sam?  Is he  to die?  (He said  there is  something I
 have to do before [I die >] the end.)(4)                            
   Sam  could  get  hold  of  the  Ring.  Frodo  betrayed   by  Gollum
 and  taken  by  orcs  (?)  to Minas  Morgol.(5) They  take his  ring and
 find  it  is no  good; they  put him  in a  dungeon, and  threaten to
 send him to Baraddur.                                               
   How  can  Sam  get  hold  of  Ring?  He  keeps  watch at  night and
 hears  Gollum  muttering  to  himself,  words  of  hatred  for Frodo.
 He  draws  his  sword  and  leaps  on  Gollum,  [?dragging]  him off.
 He  tries  to  [insert utter]  horrible words  over Frodo  - incanta-
 tion of  sleep. A  spider charm,  or does  Gollum get  spiders' help?
 There is a ravine, a spiders' glen, they have to pass at  entrance to
 Gorgoroth.  Gollum  gets  spiders  to  put spell  of sleep  on Frodo.
 Sam  drives  them  off. But  cannot wake  him. He  then gets  idea of
 taking  Ring.  He  sits  beside  Frodo. Gollum  betrays Frodo  to the
 Orc-guard.  They  are   overwhelmed  and   Sam  knocked   silly  with
 a  club.  He  puts  on  Ring   and  follows   Frodo.  (A   ring  from
 Mazarbul would be useful.)(6)                                       
   Sam   comes   and  uses   Ring.  Passes   into  Morgol   and  finds
 Frodo.  Frodo  feels  hatred  of  Sam  and  sees him  as an  orc. But
 suddenly  the  orc  speaks  and  holds  out Ring  and says:  Take it.
 Then  Frodo  sees  it  is Sam.  They creep  out. Frodo  is unable....
 Sam dresses up like an orc.                                         
   They escape but Gollum follows.                                   
   It  is Sam  that wrestles  with Gollum  and [? throws]  him finally
 in the gulf.                                                        
   How are Sam and Frodo saved from the eruption?(7)                    
                                                                    
   An additional passage, but  contemporary with  the rest,  is marked
 for insertion to this part of the outline.                          
                                                                    
       When Ring melts Dark Tower falls or is buried in ash. A great

             
                                                                          
  black cloud and shadow floats away east on a rising west wind.           
  (The smell and sound of the Sea?)                                        
     Eruption. The forces of Mordor flee  and Horsemen  of Rohan           
  pursue.                                                                  
     Frodo standing on side of Fire Mountain holds up  sword. He           
  now  commands  Ringwraiths and  bids them  be gone.  They fall           
  to earth and vanish like wisps of smoke with a terrible wail.            
     How is Frodo (and Sam) saved from Eruption?                           
                                                                          
     Story turns for a while - after first meeting of Sam, Frodo and       
  Gollum - to others.                                                      
     Owing to Boromir's treachery and Frodo's use of Ring the              
  hunt fails. Merry and Pippin are distracted by loss of Sam and           
  Frodo. They themselves get lost following echoes. They come to           
  Entwash and the Topless Forest,(8) and fall in with Treebeard               
  and his Three Giants.                                                    
     Legolas and Gimli also get lost and get captured by Saruman.?         
     Boromir and Aragorn (who notes a change in Boromir - who              
  is keen to break off the chase and go home) reach Minas Tirith,          
  which is besieged by Sauron except at back. ? Siege is briefly           
  told from point of view of watchers on battlements. Evil has             
  now hold of Boromir who is jealous of Aragorn. The Lord of             
  Minas Tirith is slain (9) and they choose Aragorn. Boromir deserts           
  and sneaks off to Saruman, to get his help in becoming Lord of           
  Minas Tirith.                                                            
     How does Gandalf reappear?                                            
                                                                          
     All this section, concerned with the 'western story', was  struck out
  and replaced, immediately,  by a  fuller and  altered version,  in which
  the idea that Legolas  and Gimli  were captured  by Saruman  is rejected
  and their new story is linked to the reappearance of Gandalf.            
                                                                          
     Story turns for a while to the others - ? after first meeting of      
  Sam, Frodo and Gollum.                                                   
  (one chapter) Owing to Boromir's treachery and Frodo's use of            
  Ring the hunt fails. Aragorn is overwhelmed with grief, thinking      
  he has failed trust as Gandalf's successor. Merry and Pippin are         
  distracted by losing Sam and Frodo, and wandering far (deluded           
  by echoes) they also get lost. Merry and Pippin come up                  
  Entwash into Fangorn and have adventure with Treebeard.                  
  Treebeard turns out a decent giant. They tell him their tale. He         
  is very perturbed by news of Saruman, and more so by the fall of         
  Gandalf. He won't go near Mordor. He offers to carry them to             
  Rohan and perhaps Minas Tirith. They set off.                            

                                 
                                                                            
        (one chapter) Boromir, Aragorn, and Legolas and Gimli.               
         Legolas  feels  the  Company  is  broken  up,   and  Gimli   has  no
        more   heart.   The  four   part.  Aragorn   and  Boromir   to  Minas
        Tirith,  Legolas  and  Gimli north.  Legolas means  to join  Elves of
        Lothlorien  for  a  while.  Gimli  means  to  go  back  up  Anduin to
        Mirkwood   and   so   home.  They   journey  together.   Legolas  and
        Gimli both sing laments. Suddenly they meet Gandalf!                 
         Gandalf's   story.   Overcame   Balrog.  The   gulf  was   not  deep
        (only  a kind  of moat  and was  full of  silent water).  He followed
        the  channel  and  got  down  into  the  Deeps.  ??  Clad  himself in
        Mithril-mail and fought his way out slaying many trolls.             
         [?Does]  Gandalf  shine  in  the  sun.  He  has  a  new  power after
        overcoming of Balrog? He is now clad in white.                       
         Gandalf  is  dreadfully  downcast  at  the  news  of  the   loss  of
        Frodo. He hastens south again with Legolas and Gimli.                
        (one  chapter)  Inside  Minas  Tirith.   Aragorn  began   to  suspect
        Boromir  at the  time of  the loss  of Frodo.  A sudden  change seems
        to  come  over  Boromir.  He  is  anxious  to  go  away home  at once
        and not look for Frodo.                                              
         Minas  Tirith  is  besieged  by  Sauron's  forces that  have crossed
        Anduin  at  Osgiliath,  and  by  Saruman  who  is  come  up  in rear.
        There   seems  no   hope.  Evil   has  now   got  complete   hold  of
        Boromir.   The   Lord  of   Minas  Tirith   is  slain.   They  choose
        Aragorn  as  chief.  Boromir  is  jealous  and  enraged -  he deserts
        and sneaks off to Saruman, seeking his aid in getting lordship.      
         At  this  point   the  siege   must  be   broken  by   Gandalf  with
        Legolas  and  Gimli  and  by  Treebeard. (But  not too  much fighting
        or  it will  spoil last  battle of  Gorgoroth.) Gandalf  might simply
        walk  through   lines,  or   else  have   a  contest   with  Saruman.
        Treebeard  walks  through.  They  see  a   huge  tree   walking  over
        plain.                                                               
         Saruman shuts himself up in Isengard.                               
         Sally  from  Minas   Tirith.  Gandalf   drives  Black   Riders  back
        and   takes   crossing   of  Anduin   at  Osgiliath.   Horsemen  ride
        behind  him  to  Gorgoroth.  Hear  a  great wind  and see  flames out
        of Fire Mountain.                                                    
         Somehow  or  other  Frodo  and   Sam  must   be  found   in  Gorgor-
        oth. Possibly by  Merry and  Pippin. (If  any one  of the  hobbits is
        slain  it  must  be the  cowardly Pippin  doing something  brave. For
        instance -                                                           
                                                                            
         Here the outline breaks off, but after a large space continues again
        lower down on the same page, and now with numbered chapters,         

 beginning  at  'XXVI'.  Since  'Moria  (ii)' was  XVII, my  father envisaged
 eight further chapters to this point.                                       
                                                                            
   After   fall   of   Mordor.   They   return   to  Minas   Tirith.  Feast.
 Aragorn comes to meet them. Moon rises [?on] Minas Morgol.                  
 XXVI    Aragorn    looks   out    and   sees    moon   rise    over   Minas
 Morgol.   He  remains   behind  -   and  becomes   Lord  of   Minas  Ithil.
 What   about   Boromir?  Does   he  repent?   [Written  later   in  margin:
 No - slain by Aragorn.]                                                     
   Gandalf   calls   at   Isengard   (see   addition).  [This   addition  is
 found  on  a  separate   slip:  On   way  home:   they  ride   horses  from
 Rohan.    The[y]    call    at    Isengard.    Gandalf    knocks.   Saruman
 comes  out  very  affable.  'Ah,  my   dear  Gandalf.   What  a   mess  the
 world  is  in.  Really  we  must  consult  together  -   such  men   as  we
 are needed. Now what about our spheres of influence?'                       
   Gandalf  looks  at  him.  'I  am  the  White  Wizard  now,'  he   said  -
 'look  at  your  many  colours.'  Saruman  is  [?clad]  in  a   filthy  mud
 colour.   'They  seem   to  have   run.'  Gandalf   takes  his   staff  and
 breaks  it  over  his  knee.  [?He  gives  a  thin shriek.]  'Go, Saruman,'
 he said, 'and beg from the charitable for a day's digging.'                 
   Isengard is given to the Dwarves. Or to Radagast?]                        
   They ride home to Rivendell.                                              
 XXVII Song of the Banished Shadow.                                          
   Rivendell. Meeting with Bilbo.                                            
 XXVIII What happens to Shire?                                               
   Last  scene.   Sailing  away   of  Elves   [added  faintly:   Bilbo  with
 them] and the [sic]                                                         
 XXIX Sam and Frodo go into a green land by the Sea?                         
                                                                            
 Certain  of  these  narrative  ideas  had  appeared  before, in  the earlier
 plot-sketches referred to  on p.  207, such  as the  siege of  Minas Tirith,
 Frodo's   separation   from  the   Company  and   Sam's  seeking   for  him,
 Gollum's  seeming  reform  and  guidance  to  the  Mountain  of   Fire,  the
 Searching  Eye,  the  'host  of   evil'  led   by  Black   Riders,  Gollum's
 treachery,  Frodo's  inability  to  cast  the  Ring into  the Fire,  and the
                                                                            
 and secure.                                                                 
   To  look  through  this  new outline  in sequence:  the fact  that nothing
 is told  herc about  Loth l6rien  (though its  people are  mentioned- 'Elves
 befriend them', and later it is told that it was Legolas' intention 'to join
 Elves of Lothlorien for a while')  suggests, not  that the  Lothlorien story
 had been written, but that  my father  was on  the verge  of writing  it and
 had  no  need  to  set  down  much  about  it.  If  it  had been  written he
 would surely  not have  included it  in the  outline at  all; and  the words

 'While they are up trees orcs go by -  also Gollum'  look like  the first
 written  emergence  of this  element in  the story.  But the  actual name
 Lothlorien  has  already made  its appearance  in the  LR papers,  in the
 new version of 'The Ring Goes South', p. 167.                            
   The  'angle'  between  the  river  flowing   down  from   Dimrill  Dale
 (Redway, Blackroot,  Silverlode) and  the Great  River (see  the original
 rough  sketch-map  given  in  VI.439)  is  now  called  Angle.  Here  the
 Company  'remained long',  but there  is no  indication whether  Elves of
 Lothlorien  were present.  It is  at Angle  that a  major feature  of the
 structure  of  LR  first  enters.  In an  earlier outline  (VI.410) Frodo
 becomes  separated  from   the  Company,   involuntarily  as   it  seems,
 through  fear  of  Gollum;  but  now  (being  already  determined  to  go
 directly to Mordor  rather than  by way  of Minas  Tirith) he  is brought
 to  the  point  of  fleeing away  alone through  Boromir, who  desires to
 appropriate  the  Ring  for  the  purposes  of  Minas Tirith.  Already my
 father  foresaw  that  Boromir,  speaking  to Frodo  apart, would  ask to
 see the Ring again, that  (as is  implied) Frodo  would refuse,  and that
 Boromir would then try to take it  by force  and oblige  Frodo to  put it
 on in order to escape from him  - explaining  how it  was that  Frodo got
 clear  away  and could  not be  found despite  the hunt  for him.  On the
 other hand, since  all this  takes place  at Angle,  there is  no journey
 down  Anduin,  boats  are  never  mentioned  -  and  there is  no mention
 even of  Frodo's need  to cross  the river.  The whole  story of  how Sam
 i  would  come  to  accompany  Frodo   on  his   journey  to   the  Fiery
 Mountain  would  be  entirely  changed  (though  not  before it  had been
 further developed from its form in this outline).                        
   In  the  account  of  that  journey several  new names  appear. Lithlad
 the  Plain  of  Ash  appears  once  in  LR  (The  Two  Towers  IV.3, 'the
 mournful  plains  of  Lithlad  and  of   Gorgoroth'),  though   for  some
 reason  the  name  was not  entered on  either of  the maps  published in
 LR;  it is  found however  on the  First Map  (p. 309)  and subsequently.
 The  plain  of  Lithlad  lay  south  of Ered  Lithui, the  Ash Mountains,
 away to the east of  Barad -  dur; there  would thus  seem no  reason for
 Frodo and Sam ever to have come to  it, as  seems to  be implied  in this
 outline.  The  valley  of  Gorgoroth,  above  which  was  built  the Dark
 Tower, appears in the fifth version of 'The Council of Elrond'  (p. 144),
 and the  Gap of  Gorgoroth ('with  Orc guard-towers  on either  side') in
 this outline is the first intimation of a pass between the mountain-walls
 fencing  Mordor  on  north  and  west   (afterwards  Udun,   between  the
 Morannon and the Isenmouthe).                                            
   The  winged  Nazgul  -  Black  Riders  horsed   now  upon   vultures  -
 appear, but here in the role of leaders of the host of Mordor as it rides
 out to battle. Sam's part in the final events was still very  shadowy and
 speculative,  but  already  the  idea  enters  that  Gollum  (whose inner
 motives  seem to  have been  far less  complex in  respect of  Frodo than
 they  afterwards  became)  would  betray Sam  and Frodo  to spiders  in a

  ravine or glen 'at the entrance to Gorgoroth'. At this  stage, as  will be
  seen later, the entry into Mordor  by way  of the  Stairs of  Cirith Ungol
  did  not  exist,  and  when  that name  appears it  will bear  a different
  geographical sense.  The spiders  seem to  have arisen  in the  context of
  explaining  how  Sam  came  to  take  the  Ring  from Frodo;  and features
  of  the later  story begin  to take  shape: Sam's  rout of  the spider(s),
  Gollum's  betrayal  of  the  unconscious  Frodo to  the orcs,  his capture
  and  imprisonment  (but  here  in  Minas  Morgol),  Sam's  entry  into the
  fortress  wearing  the Ring,  Frodo's sudden  hatred of  Sam whom  he sees
  as an orc, and their escape.                                              
    The  Breaking  of  the  Fellowship  imposed  on  my  father the  need to
  follow  two  distinct  narrative  paths,  but  he  would still  follow the
  fortunes  of  Frodo  and  Sam  somewhat  further  before returning  to the
  others  (since  the  reunion  of  Sam  and  Frodo,  involving  Sam's first
  falling  in with  Gollum, was  much less  swiftly achieved  than it  is in
  FR).                                                                      
    The second narrative again  takes a  huge step  forward here,  but there
  was  still  a  great  way  to  go.  Most important,  Merry and  Pippin now
  move into a central position in the story,  and it  is they  (not as  in a
  former  outline  Frodo,  VI.410)  who   encounter  Treebeard   -  although
  the  entire  narrative  of the  attack by  Orcs on  the camp  beneath Amon
  Hen,  Boromir's  death,  the  forced  march across  Rohan, and  the battle
  between  the Rohirrim  and the  Orcs on  the eaves  of Fangorn  is absent.
  Merry  and  Pippin  merely become  lost as  they seek  for Frodo  and Sam,
  and  wandering  along  the  river  Entwash  (which  here   first  appears)
  come to the Forest of Fangorn without  any relation  to the  larger story;
  but through them  Treebeard (now  finally established  as a  'decent' sort
  of person, cf. p. 71) comes to play a part in the breaking of the siege of
  Minas Tirith.                                                             
    On  the  other  hand,  for  Aragorn and  Boromir my  father had  at this
  time  a  plan  almost  wholly  different  from  what  would  soon  emerge.
  Departing together to  Minas Tirith,  the original  Company will  be still
  further  fragmented,  for  Legolas  and  Gimli   (escaping  the   fate  of
  capture  by  Saruman  momentarily  projected  for  them,  p. 210)  set off
  north together. It is indeed Legolas and  Gimli who  fall in  with Gandalf
  returned,  now  clad  in  white  and  possessed  of  new powers,  and with
  him  they  turn  back  and  hasten south;  but there  is no  indication of
  where they met him (save that  it was  south of  Lothlorien), and  in fact
  no  indication  of  geography  for  any  of these  events. Rohan  plays no
  part in the  story at  all (beyond  the several  mentions of  the Horsemen
  riding against Mordor), and the  Siege of  Minas Tirith  is (mysteriously)
  to  be  'broken  by  Gandalf  with  Legolas and  Gimli and  by Treebeard.'
  Boromir  would  play  a  shameful part,  treacherously fleeing  to Saruman
  (a  faint  adumbration  of  Wormtongue?)  in   his  hatred   for  Aragorn,
  chosen  to  be  successor  to  the  slain lord  of Minas  Tirith. Isengard
  remains  inviolate,  and  the  Ents  do  not  appear (10) - yet the visit of

 Gandalf to Saruman  in his  fortress, and  his humiliation,  is present,
 placed here on the homeward journey.                                    
                                                                        
   Much  of  the narrative  'material', it  may be  said, was  now assem-
 bled. But the structure of that narrative in the lands west of Anduin as
 my  father  now  foresaw  it  would  be  wholly  changed,   and  changed
 above all by the emergence of the Kingdom of Rohan  into the  full light
 of the story, and of its relations with Gondor and with Isengard.(11)    
                                                                        
                                  NOTES.                                 
                                                                        
 1. 'Reach  Lothlorien  Dec.  15':  this  date  does  not agree  with the
  chronology,  which  is  surprising.  The  time-scheme  referred   to  on
  p.  169,  which  clearly  accompanied  this  state  of   the  narrative,
  continues  on  from  'December  9  Snow  on   Caradras'  (a   date  that
  actually appears in the text) thus:                                    
      Dec. 10 Retreat. Wolves at night.                                  
         11. Start    for    Moria.    Reach    Doors    at    sundown.
  Travel in Mines till midnight (15 miles).                              
         12. Well-chamber.  All  day  in  Moria  (20  miles).   Night  in
  21st Hall.                                                             
         13. Mazarbul. Battle of Bridge. Escape to Lothlorien.           
      This  scheme   was  made   when  the   'Lothlorien'  story   was  at
  any  rate  in  progress,  but  the  earliest  sketch  of  the  march  of
  the   Company   from   Dimrill   Dale   (p.   218)   demands   the  date
  13 December.                                                           
 2. The  name  Anduin,  thus  written  and not  the result  of subsequent
  correction,  occurs  in  the fifth  version of  'The Council  of Elrond'
  (p.  157  note  5).  The  name  Blackroot  shows  that this  outline was
  written  after  the  new  version   of  'The   Ring  Goes   South'  (see
  p. 166).                                                               
 3. This sentence was put in as an  afterthought at  a different  point in
  the manuscript, but it seems appropriate to insert it here.            
 4. Sam said this to Frodo after  the night  spent with  the Elves  in the
  Woody End (FR p. 96).                                                  
 5. This  part of  the text  was written  in pencil,  but these  few lines
  were  overwritten  in  ink  later   (apparently  simply   for  clarity's
  sake),  and  the  form  as  overwritten  is  actually  Morgul; elsewhere
  in the outline, however, the form is Morgol.                           
 6. The  'ring  from  Mazarbul'  evidently  refers back  to what  is said
  earlier: 'They take [Frodo's] ring and find it is no good.'            
 7. A  scrap  of  torn paper  found  in  isolation  bears  the  following
  pencilled notes dashed down in haste:                                  
          Could Sam steal the Ring to save Frodo from danger?            
          The  Black  Riders capture  Frodo and  he is  taken to  Mordor -
  but he has no Ring and is put in prison.                               

      Sam flees - but is pursued by Gollum.                              
      It is Sam and Gollum that wrestle on the Mountain.                 
      Frodo is saved by the fall of the Tower.                           
                                                                        
     It seems very probable that these notes  belong to  the same  time as
     the present outline. On  the same  scrap are  notes referring  to the
     Shire at the  end of  the story,  when Frodo  and Sam  returning find
     that  'Cosimo  [Sackville-Baggins]  has industrialised  it. Factories
     and  smoke. The  Sandymans have  a biscuit  factory. Iron  is found.'
     The  last  words  are:  'They  go  west and  set sail  to Greenland.'
     Greenland  is  clear,  however improbable  it may  seem; but  cf. the
     last words of the present outline (p.  212): 'Sam  and Frodo  go into
     a green land by the Sea'.                                           
  8. Fangorn is called 'the Topless Forest' in a rejected sentence  in the
     new version of 'The Ring Goes South', p. 167.                       
  9. In  the  outline  given  in  VI.411  the  King  of Ond  was Boromir's
     father.                                                             
 10. Since in the sketch-plot given in  VI.410 the  'tree-giants' assailed
     the  besiegers  of  Ond,  it may  be that  their presence  was under-
     stood in this outline also; but this is not in any way suggested.
 11. Looked at  in terms  of the  movements of  the principal  persons, it
     seems that a crucial idea, though  at once  rejected, would  turn out
     to  have  been  the  capture   of  Legolas   and  Gimli   by  Saruman
     (p.  210).  My  father  remained  convinced,  perhaps,  that  Saruman
     did  nonetheless  play  a part  in the  fragmentation of  the Company
     of  the  Ring;  and  the  aimless  wanderings  of  Merry  and  Pippin
     along   the  Entwash   that  brought   them  to   Treebeard's  domain
     were  transformed into  the forced  march of  captives to  Isengard -
     for Isengard was close to the  Forest of  Fangorn. Thus  entered also
     the  death   of  Boromir,   and  the   withdrawal  of   Aragorn  from
     immediate departure to Minas Tirith.                                

                                     XII.                                   
                                                                           
                                  LOTHLORIEN.                               
                                                                           
 In the first fully-written narrative, the two chapters  6 and  7 in  Book II
 of  FR  ('Lothlorien'  and  'The  Mirror  of  Galadriel')  are  one,  though
 here treated separately. This text is  extremely complex  in that,  while it
 constitutes a  nearly complete  narrative, the  form in  which it  exists is
 not the result of writing in a simple sequence; parts of it are  later, with
 later  names,  and  were  written  over  a partly  or wholly  erased earlier
 form.   Other   parts  were   not  rewritten   and  earlier   names  appear,
 sometimes  corrected,  sometimes  not;  and  the  original  text   was  much
 emended throughout.                                                        
   In  fact,  it  seems to  me certain  that the  whole text,  including some
 scraps  of  initial  drafting and  outlining on  isolated pages,  belongs to
 the  same  time  and  the  same  impulse.  The  'August   1940'  examination
 script  was  once  again  used  for  the  entire  complex  of   papers.  The
 manuscript varies greatly in  difficulty, some  sections being  fairly clear
 and  legible,  others  very  much  the  reverse.  In  places  words  are  so
 reduced  and  letter-shapes  so  transformed  that one  might well  hit upon
 the right word but not know  it, if  there are  insufficient clues  from the
 context   or   from  the   later  text.   Word-endings  are   miswritten  or
 omitted, successive  forms of  a sentence  are left  standing side  by side,
 and  punctuation  is constantly  lacking. This  is a  case where  the actual
 appearance  of  the  manuscript  is exceedingly  different from  the printed
 interpretation of it.                                                      
   No satisfactory presentation of such a  text as  this is  really possible.
 If  the  earliest  form of  the story  is given,  and the  later alterations
 ignored, then difficulties  such as  the following  are encountered.  In the
 passage  where  Legolas  reports  to  the others  his conversation  with the
 Elves  in  the  mallorn-tree  (FR p.  357) the  original narrative  (in ink)
 had:                                                                       
                                                                           
   Now  they bid  us to  climb up,  three in  each of  these trees  that stand
   here near together. I will go first.                                     
                                                                           
 This was corrected (in pencil) to a form close to that of FR:              
                                                                           
   Now  they  bid  me  to  climb  up  with  Frodo,  of   whom  they   seem  to
   have  heard. The  rest they  ask to  wait a  little, and  to keep  watch at
   the foot of the tree.                                                    
                                                                           
     But the primary narrative then continues (in pencil) on the next sheet

 with this revised  story, in  which Legolas  and Frodo  are the  first to
 ascend (with  Sam behind).  On the  other hand,  if all  later alteration
 (which  is  in any  case far  from achieving  an overall  consistency) is
 admitted,  the  FR  form  is  closely approached  and the  earlier stages
 ignored.  I  have  adopted therefore  the former  method, and  attempt to
 clarify complexities  as they  arise. The  notes to  this chapter  form a
 commentary on the text and are integral to its presentation.             
                                                                         
   A  few  brief  notes  about the  sojourn of  the Company  in Lothlorien
 begin the long preparatory synopsis given in the  last chapter  (p. 207).
 There is there no suggestion  of Galadriel  and Celeborn;  and it  is 'at
 Angle',  between  Blackroot  and  Anduin,  that  Boromir   accosts  Frodo
 and  attempts  to  take  the  Ring. The  first march  from Moria  is more
 fully sketched in the following notes.                                   
                                                                         
    They  pass into  Dimrill Dale.  It is  a golden  afternoon, but  dark in
   the Dale.                                                              
    Mirrormere. Smooth sward. Deep blue like night sky.                   
    [Notes  scribbled  in  later:  Orcs  won't  come  out  by  day.  Frodo's
   wounds dressed by Trotter, so they discover the mithril-mail.]         
    No   time  to   stay.  Gimli's   regret.  See   the  black   springs  of
   Morthond;(1) follow it.                                                  
    Make  for  Lothlorien.  Legolas'  description.  The  wood  is  in winter
   but still bears leaves that  have turned  golden. They  do not  fall till
   spring,  when  the  green  comes,  and  great  yellow  flowers. It  was a
   garden  of  the  Wood-elves  long  ago  -  before  the  dwarves disturbed
   the evils  beneath the  mountains, he  said (Gimli  does not  like that).
   They  lived  in houses  in trees  before the  darkening world  drove them
   underground.(2)                                                        
    In  dusk  Frodo  again  hears  feet but  cannot see  anything following.
   They march on into the dusk.                                           
    They take refuge in trees, and see Orcs march by beneath.             
    Frodo  long  after  sees a  sloping back[ed]  figure moving  swiftly. It
   sniffs under the tree, stares up, and then disappears.                 
                                                                         
 The passage of the Orcs  beneath, and  the coming  of Gollum,  were first
 referred to in the outline given on p. 207.                              
   I  turn  now  to  the  narrative.  The chapter  is numbered  XVIII, and
 paginated continuously (with one gap),  but it  has no  title. As  I have
 said, I give (so far as possible) the most original form of the text, and
 do  not, as  a rule,  indicate small  subsequent emendations  bringing it
 nearer to FR, though many  or all  of them  may well  belong to  the same
 time.                                                                    
                                                                         
   'Alas, I fear we cannot wait here longer!' said Aragorn. He           
 looked towards the mountains, and held up his sword.                     
 'Farewell,  Gandalf,'  he  cried.  'Did  I not  say to  you: if  you pass

    the  doors  of  Moria,  beware?  I  know  not  what  put   the  words
    into  my  mouth,  but  alas!  that  I  spoke  true. No  fortune could
    have  been  more  grievous.  What  hope  have  we  without  you?'  He
    turned  to  the  Company.  'We  must  do  without  hope!'   he  said.
    'At  least we  may yet  be avenged.  Let us  gird ourselves  and weep
    no  more.  It  is better  to strike  hard than  to mourn  long! Come!
    We have a long road and much to do!'                                
      They  rose  and  looked   about  them.   Northward  the   Dale  ran
    up  into  a  glen  of  shadows   between  two   great  arms   of  the
    mountains,  above  which  three  tall   white  peaks   towered.(4) Many
    torrents fell white over the steep sides into the  valley. A  mist of
    foam hung in the air.                                               
      To  the  west  [read  east](5) the  mountains  marched  to  a  sudden
    end,  and  far  lands  could  be  descried  beyond  them   vague  and
    wide.  To  the  south  the  mountains  receded  endlessly  as  far as
    sight could reach. Less than  a mile  away, and  below them  a little
    (for they stood still on the skirts of the mountains) lay a  mere: it
    was  long and  oval, shaped  like a  great spear-head  that-thrust up
    deep  into  the  northern  glen.  Its  southern  end  was  beyond the
    edge  of  the  shadow,  under  the  sunny  sky.  But its  waters were
    dark:  a  deep  blue  like  the  night  sky  seen  through  a lighted
    window.  Its  face was  still and  unruffled. About  it lay  a smooth
    sward shelving on all sides down to its bare unbroken rim.(6)    
      'There  lies  Kheledzaram,(7) the  Mirror-mere!'  said  Gimli sadly.
    'I hoped to look on it in  joy and  linger here  a while.  I remember
    that  he  said:  "May you  have joy  of the  sight, but  whatever you
    may  do  I  cannot  stay." Now  it is  I that  must hasten  away, and
    he that must stay.'                                                 
      The   Company   went   down   the  road,   fading and broken,  but
    still  showing  that  here  a  great  paved  way  had  once  wound up
    from  the  lowlands  to  the  gate. It  passed hard  by the  sward of
    Mirror-mere, and there  not far  from the  road by  the brink  of the
    water there stood a single column, now broken at the top.           
      'That  is  Durin's  Stone,'  said  Gimli.  '[We  >]  I  cannot pass
    without  pausing  there  a  minute, to  look upon  the wonder  of the
    Dale.'                                                              
      'Be  swift  then,'  said  Trotter, looking  back towards  the Gate.
    'The sun sinks early. Orcs will  not come  out till  it is  dusk, but
    we  must  be  far  away  ere night  comes. The  moon will  appear for
    the last time tonight and it will be dark.'                         
      'Come  with  me,  Frodo,'  said  the  dwarf,  'and  any   else  who
    wish., But only Sam and Legolas followed.(8) He ran down the           
 l                                                                      

 sward and looked at the pillar. The runes upon it were worn          
 away. 'This stone marks the spot where Durin first looked in the     
 Mirror-mere,' said the dwarf. 'Let us look.' They stooped over       
 the water.                                                           
   For a while they could see nothing. No shadow of themselves        
 fell on the mere. Slowly at the edges they saw the forms of the      
 encircling mountains revealed, mirrored in a profound blue, and      
 amidst it a space of sky. There like jewels in the deep shone        
 glinting stars, though the sunlight was in the sky above. No '       
 shadow of themselves was seen.                                       
   'Fair Kheledzaram,' said Gimli. 'There lies the crown of           
 Durin till he wakes. Farewell.' He bowed and turned away, and        
 hastened back up the sward to the road again.                        
   It wound now quickly down running away southwest [read             
 southeast](9) out from between the arms of the mountains. A             
 little below the Mere they came upon a deep well of dark water       
 almost black; from it a freshet fell over a stone lip and ran        
 gurgling away in a stony channel. 'This is the spring whence the     
 Blackroot rises,' said Gimli. 'Do not drink from it: it is icy cold.'
   'Soon,' said Trotter, 'it will become a swift river, fed by many
 other torrents from [?all the land]. Our road leads beside it. And
 we must go swifter than it runs. There is our way.' Out on           
 before them they could see the Blackroot winding away in the         
 lower land, until it was lost in a distance that glowed like pale
 gold on the edge of sight.                                           
   'There lie the woods of Lothlorien,' said Trotter. 'Their eaves
 are yet many miles away (four leagues or more), but we must          
 reach them before night.'                                            
   [Now they went on silently](10) for some time, but every step         
 grew more painful for Frodo. In spite of the bright [?winter] sun
 the air seemed biting after the warm dark of Moria. Sam at [his]     
 side was also failing. The cut in his arm was paining him.(11)      
 They lagged behind together. Trotter looked back anxiously.          
 'So much has happened,' he said, 'that I had forgotten you,          
 Frodo, and Sam. I am sorry: you are both hurt, and we have           
 done nothing to ease you or to find out how serious are your         
 hurts. What shall we do? There is nothing we can do in this          
 empty region, with the gate and our foes so near behind.'            
   'How far is there still to go?' said Frodo.                        
   They have a first meal 2 1/2 hours after noon. Beside a             
 beautiful little fall in the Blackroot, where another torrent        
 coming from west flowed out and they both fell over some green       

 stone.  Trotter  dresses  Sam's  wound.  'The  cut  is  looking ill  - but
 luckily  is  not  (as  orc-cuts may  be) poisoned.'  Trotter bathes  it in
 the water and lays a leaf of athelas against it.                          
   Then  he  turns  attention  to  Frodo.  Reluctantly  he  strips  off his
 jacket   and   tunic,   and  suddenly   the  mithril-corslet   shines  and
 flashes  in  the  sun.  Trotter  strips  it  from  him  and  holds  it up.
 Description of its radiance.                                              
   'This  is  a  pretty  hobbit-skin!'  said  Trotter.  'If  it  were known
 they  wore  such  a  hide,  all  the  hunters  of   the  world   would  be
 crowding to the Shire.'                                                   
   'And  all  the  hunters  of  the  world  [would]  shoot  in  vain,' said
 Gimli,  staring  in  amazement.  'Bilbo  saved  your  life  -  it   was  a
 generous and timely gift.'                                                
   There  was  a  great  dark  bruise  on  Frodo's  side  and  breast,  the
 rings  driven  through  shirt  into  flesh...  His  left  side   also  was
 bruised against the wall.                                                 
   'Nothing is broken,' said Trotter.                                      
                                                                          
   The text now becomes for a  space very  ragged, the  story being  in its
 most  primitive  form  of  composition,  and  soon  passes  into  a  rough
 sketch of the narrative to come.                                          
                                                                          
    Kindle  fire  warm  water  bathed  in  athelas.  Pads   fastened  under
   the mail, which is put on again.                                        
    They  hurry  on  again.  Sun  sinks  behind  mountains.  Shadows  creep
   out  down  mountain  side and  over the  land. Dusk  is about  them, but
   there is a glow on the land to the East.... pale yellow in dusk.(12)    
   They   have  come   12-14  miles   from  Gate   and  are   nearly  done.
   Legolas describes Lothlorien.                                           
    Near  forest  gate  another  small  river  comes  in from  right (west)
   across the path. The bridge  is no  longer there.  They wade  across and
   halt on other side with water as defence. Climb trees.                  
    Orcs  ...  at  night.  But  a  pleasant  [? adventure]  with Wood-elves
   next day.  They are  escorted to  Wood-elves' houses  in trees  in angle
   of  Blackroot  and  Anduin  by  light  marches  (no orc  comes). Several
   (2-3)  pleasant  days.  40  miles.  Sorrow  of whole  world for  news of
   fall  of  Gandalf. They  are now  nearly 100  leagues (300  miles) south
   of Rivendell.(13)                                                       
                                                                          
 An isolated page of very  rough drafting  takes up  with Frodo's  reply to
 Gimli's question (' "What is it?" said the dwarf', FR p. 351):            
                                                                          
     'I don't know,' said Frodo. 'I thought I heard feet, and I thought I
   saw light - like eyes. I have done so often since we entered Moria.'
    Gimli  paused  and  stooped  to  the  ground. 'I  can hear  nothing but

                                
                                                                    
 the night-speech of plant and stone,' he said.  'Come, let  us hurry!
 The others are out of sight already.'                               
  The night wind blew chill up the  valley to  meet them.  They passed
 many scattered trees, tall with pale stems. In  front a  great shadow
 loomed, and the endless rustle of leaves like poplars in the breeze.
  'Lothlorien,'  said  Legolas.  'Lothlorien.  We  are  come   to  the
 [?gates] of the golden wood. Alas that it is winter.'               
                                                                    
 Here the formed narrative takes up again. (14)                      
                                                                    
 Under  the  night  the  trees  stood  tall  before them,  arched over
 the  stream  and  road  that  ran  suddenly  beneath  their spreading
 boughs. In the  dim light  of the  stars their  stems were  grey, and
 their quivering leaves a hint of fallow gold.                       
 'Lothlorien!'  said  Aragorn.  'Glad  I  am to  hear the  leaves! We
 are barely five leagues from  the Gates,  but we  can go  no further.
 Let  us  hope  that  there  is  some  virtue of  the Elves  that will
 protect  us this  night -  if Elves  indeed dwell  here still  in the
 darkening world.'(15)                                               
 'It is  long since  any of  my folk  returned hither,'  said Legolas;
 'for we dwell now  very far  away; yet  it is  told that  though some
 have gone for ever  some abide  still in  Lothlorien, but  they dwell
 deep in the wood many leagues from here.'(16)                       
 'Then  we  must  fend  for  ourselves  tonight,'  said  Aragorn. 'Let
 us go on yet a little way until the wood  is all  about us,  and then
 will turn aside from the road.'                                     
 A   mile   within   the   wood   they   came   upon   another  stream
 flowing  down  swiftly  from  the   tree-clad  slopes   that  climbed
 back  towards  the  Mountains. They  heard it  splashing over  a fall
 away  among   the  shadows   on  their   right.  Its   dark  hurrying
 waters  ran  across  the  path  before  them  and joined  the [Black-
 root  >]  Morthond  in  a  swirl  of  dim  pools  among the  roots of
 trees.                                                              
 'Here  is  the  [Taiglin  >]  Linglor,'  said  Legolas.  'Of  it  the
 wood-elves   made   many   songs,   remembering   the   rainbow  upon
 its singing falls and the golden  flowers that  floated in  its foam.
 All is dark now, and the  Bridge of  Linglor that  the elves  made is
 broken  down.  But  it  is  not deep.  Let us  wade across.  There is
 healing in its [cold >] cool waters / But I will bathe my feet  in it
 - for it is said that  its waters  are healing.  On the  further bank
 we  can  rest,  and  the  sound  of  running   water  may   bring  us
 sleep.'(17)                                                         
 They  followed  the  elf,  and  one  by  one  climbed down  the steep
 bank  and  bathed  their  [feet](18) in  the   stream.  For   a  moment

 Frodo stood near the bank and let the cold water flow about his            
 tired feet. It was cold but its very touch was clean, and as it            
 mounted to his knees he felt that the stain  of travel  and the            
 weariness of his limbs was washed away.                                    
   When  all the  Company had  crossed they  sat and  rested and            
 ate a little food, while Legolas told them tales  of Lothlorien            
 before the world was grey.                                                 
                                                                           
   Here there is a space  in the  manuscript, with  the words  insert song.
 There  are  many  pages  of  rough  working  for  Legolas' song  of Amroth
 and  Nimrodel, leading  to a  version that  (while certainly  belonging to
 this time) is for much of its length  very close  to the  form in  FR (pp.
 354 - 5).  The name  of the  maiden is  Linglorel (once  Inglorel), becom-
 ing  Nimladel,  Nimlorel (see  note 17),  and in  the final  version found
 here  Nimlothel  (corrected  to  Nimrodel).  Her  lover  was  Ammalas (as
 he appears in  the narrative  that follows),  and the  form Amroth  can be
 seen  emerging  as  my father  wrote the  first line  of the  ninth verse:
 'When  Ammalas   beheld  the   shore',  with   a  rejected   name  Amaldor
 momentarily  appearing  before  the  line  became  'When  Amroth  saw  the
 fading shore'.                                                             
   Associated with  the texts  of the  song is  a version  of the  words of
 Legolas that preceded it (FR p. 353):                                      
                                                                           
      'I will sing you a song,' he said. 'It is a fair song in  the woodland
   tongue:  but  this  is  how  it  runs in  the common  speech, as  some in
   Rivendell have turned it.' In a soft voice  hardly to  be heard  amid the
   rustle of the leaves above he began.                                     
                                                                           
 This  is  apparently the  first appearance  of the  term Common  Speech. -
 The final version found here is virtually as that in FR through  the first
 six verses (but with the name Nimlothel); then follows:                    
                                                                           
              A wind awoke in Northern lands                                
                 and loud it blew and free,                                 
              and bore the ship from Elven-strands                          
                 across the shining sea.                                    
                                                                           
              Beyond the waves the shores were grey,                       
                 the mountains sinking low;                                 
              as salt as tears the driving spray                            
                 the wind a cry of woe.                                    
                                                                           
              When Amroth saw the fading shore                             
                 beyond the heaving swell                                   
              he cursed the faithless. ship that bore                       
                 him far from Nimlothel.                                    
                                                                           
                An Elven-lord he was of old                                 
                  before the birth of men                                  

         when first the boughs were hung with gold                       
                in fair Lothlorien.                                       
                                                                         
 A variant of this verse is given:                                        
                                                                         
         An Elven-lord he was o f old                                   
                when all the woods were young                             
         and in Lothlorien with gold                                      
                the boughs of trees were hung.                           
                                                                         
 The eleventh verse, and the last verse, are as in FR, but the twelfth
 reads here:                                                              
                                                                         
         The foam was in his flowing hair,                              
                a light about him shone;                                  
         afar they saw the waves him bear                                
                as floats the northern swan.                              
                                                                         
 Pencilled suggestions in the margins, no  doubt of  this same  time, move
 the verses a little further towards the final form; and at the end of the
 song my father noted: 'If all this is included, Legolas will have  to say
 that it represents only a few  of the  verses of  the original  (e.g. the
 departure from Lorien is omitted).'                                      
                                                                         
  An outline for the next part of the story may be given here. It  is very
 roughly   written  indeed,   and  I   have  made   one  or   two  obvious
 corrections.                                                             
                                                                         
   Legolas sings song of Linglorel.                                       
   Legolas describes the houses of the Galadrim.                          
   Gimli says trees would be safer.                                       
   Aragorn decides to climb for night.                                    
   They find a group of great  trees near  the falls  (to right).  Legolas is
  about   to   climb   one   with  many   low  boughs   when  a   voice  in
  elven-speech   comes   from  above.   He  fears   arrows.  But   after  a
  converse in elven-speech  reports that  all is  well. Warnings  of things
  afoot  have  reached  folk  of  Lorien  from  the  Gladden  Fields,  when
  Elrond's  messengers  came  East.  They  have   set  guards.   (Saw  many
  orcs  passing  west  of  Lorien towards  Moria: put  this in  later, when
  Elves talk to Company.) [See pp. 227 - 8.]                              
   They  did  not  challenge  or  shoot because  they heard  Legolas' voice
  -  and after  the sound  of his  song. They  have a  great platform  in 2
  trees by the falls.                                                     
   Legolas,  Sam  and  Frodo  go  on  platform  with  3  elves.  Others  on
  another platform and Aragorn and Boromir in crotch of a large tree.     
   Orcs  come  to  Linglorel  in  night.  The  Elves  do not  shoot because
  they  are  in  too  great  number:  but one  slips away  to warn  folk in
  wood and prepare an ambush.                                             

                                             
                                                                     
  After  all  is  quiet  again Frodo  sees Gollum  creep into  wood. He
 looks up and begins to climb, but just as the Elves fit arrows  to bow
 Frodo stays them. Gollum has a sense of danger and fades away.       
  Next day the Elves lead them to Angle.                              
                                                                     
 After the song of Legolas the narrative continues:                   
                                                                     
 His  voice  faltered  and  fell  silent.  'I do  not remember  all the
 words,' he said. 'It is a fair song,  and that  is but  the beginning;
 for it is  long and  sad. It  tells how  sorrow came  upon Lothlorien,
 Lorien   of   the   flowers,   when  the   world  darkened,   and  the
 dwarves awakened evil in the Mountains.'                             
 'But the dwarves did not make the evil,' said Gimli.                 
 'I  said  not  so,' said  Legolas sadly.  'Yet evil  came. And  it was
 told  that  Linglorel (19) was  lost.  For  such  was  the  name  of that
 maiden,  and  they  gave   the  same   name  to   the  mountain-stream
 that  she  loved:  she  sang  beside  the  waterfalls  playing  upon a
 harp.  There  in  spring  when  the  wind  is  in  the new  leaves the
 echo of  her voice  may still  be heard,  they say.  But the  elves of
 her  kindred  departed,  and  she  was  lost  in  the  passes  of  the
 mountains,(20) and  none  know  where  she  now  may   be.  It   is  said
 in the song that the elven  ship waited  in the  havens long  for her,
 but  a  wind  arose  in  the  night and  bore him  into the  West; and
 when  Ammalas (21) her lover  saw  that  the  land  was  far  away  he
 leaped  into the  sea, but  whether he  came ever  back to  the Hither
 Shores and found Linglorel is not told.                              
 'It  is  said  that  Linglorel  had  a  house built  in branches  of a
 tree; for  that was  the manner  of the  Elves of  Lorien, and  may be
 yet;  and  for  that  reason  they  are  called  Galadrim,  the  Tree-
 people.(22) Deep  in  the  wood  the  trees  are  very  tall  and strong.
 And  our  people  did  not  delve  in the  ground or  build fastnesses
 before the Shadows [read Shadow] came.'                              
 'Yet even so,  in these  latter days,  a dwelling  in the  trees might
 be  thought  safer  than  sitting  on  the  ground,'  said  Gimli.  He
 looked  across  the  water  to  the  road  that  led  back  to Dimrill
 Dale, and then up into the roof of dark boughs above them.           
 'Your   words   bring   good  counsel,   Gimli,' said Aragorn.(23) 'We
 have  no  time  to  build,  but  tonight we  will become  Galadrim and
 seek- refuge in  the tree-tops,  if we  can. We  have sat  here beside
 the road longer already than was wise.'                              
                                                                     
 The Company now turned aside from the path, and went into            
 the shadows of the deeper woods westward, away from the              
 Blackroot. Not far from the falls of Linglorel they found a          

                                                            
                                                                        
 cluster of tall strong trees, some of which overhung the                
 stream.(24)                                                             
  'I will climb up,' said Legolas, 'for I am at home among trees,        
 or in their branches; though these trees are of a kind strange to       
 me. Mallorn is their name, those that bear the yellow blossom,          
 but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what is their           
 shape and growth.' He sprang lightly upward from the ground             
 and caught a branch that grew from the tree-bole high above his         
 head. Even as he swung a voice spoke from the shadows above             
 them.                                                                   
  'Daro!'(25) it said, and Legolas dropped back again in surprise            
 and fear. He shrank against the tree-bole. 'Stand still,' he            
 whispered to the others, 'and do not speak!'                            
  There was a sound of laughter above their heads and another            
 clear voice spoke in the Elven-tongue. Frodo could catch little         
 that was said, for the speech of the silvan folk east of the            
 mountains, such as they used among themselves, was strange.(26)         
 Legolas looked up and answered in the same tongue.                      
  'Who are they and what do they say?' said [Pippin >] Merry.            
  'They're elves,' said Sam. 'Can't you hear the voices?'                
  'They say,' said Legolas, 'that you breathe so loud that they          
 could shoot you in the dark. But that you need have no fear.            
 They have been watching us for a long time. They heard my               
 voice across the Linglorel and knew of what people I came, so           
 that they did not oppose our crossing. And they have heard my           
 song and heard the names of Linglorel and Ammalas. Now they             
 bid us to climb up, three in each of these trees that stand here        
 near together. I will go first.'                                        
                                                                        
  The last part of Legolas'  remarks was  changed in  pencil to  the text
 of  FR: 'Now  they bid  me to  climb up  with Frodo,  of whom  they seem
 to have heard. The rest they ask to wait a little, and to keep  watch at
 the foot of the tree.' The manuscript then continues for a short stretch
 in pencil, and clearly belongs with this  alteration, since  Legolas and
 Frodo are the first to ascend.                                          
                                                                        
  Out  of  the  shadows  there  was  let  down  a  ladder of  silver rope
 -  very  slender  it  looked,  but  proved  strong  enough to  bear many
 men.   Legolas   climbed   swiftly  followed   more  slowly   by  Frodo,
 and  behind  came  Sam  trying  not  to  breathe  loud.  The   tree  was
 very  tall  [written  above:  a mallorn],  and its  large bole  was fair
 and  round  with   a  smooth   silken  bark.   The  branches   grew  out
 nearly  straight  at  first  and then  swept upwards;  but near  the top

 of the main stem dwindled  into a  crown, and  there they  found a
 wooden platform [added: or 'flet'  as such  things were  called in
 those  days:  the  elves  called it  talan. It  was] made  of grey
 close-grained wood - the wood of the mallorn.                    
   Three  elves  were seated  on it.  They were  clad in  grey, and
 could not be seen against  the tree-stems  unless they  moved. One
 of them  uncovered a  small lamp  that gave  out a  slender silver
 beam and held it up, looking at their faces. Then he shut  out the
 light  and  spoke  words  of  welcome in  the Elven  tongue. Frodo
 spoke haltingly in return.                                       
   'Welcome,'  they  said  again  in  ordinary  speech.   Then  one
 spoke  slowly.  'We  speak  seldom  any  tongue  but our  own,' he
 said; 'for  we dwell  now in  the heart  of the  woods and  do not
 willingly have dealings with any other  folk. Some  only of  us go
 abroad for the gathering of tidings and our protection. I  am one.
 Hathaldir  is  my  name.  My  brothers  Orfin  and  Rhimbron speak
 your tongue  but little.  We have  heard of  your coming,  for the
 messengers  of  Elrond  passed  through  Lothlorien  on  their way
 home  by  the  Dimrill  Stair.(27) We  had   not  heard   of  hobbits
 before, nor even seen one  until now.  You do  not look  evil, and
 you come  with Legolas,  who is  of our  northern kindred.  We are
 willing to do as Elrond asked and befriend you.  Though it  is not
 our  custom  we  will  lead  you  through our  land. But  you must
 stay here tonight. How many are you?'(28)                        
   'Eight,' said Legolas. 'Myself,  four hobbits,  two men  (one is
 Aragorn,  an  elf-friend, beloved  of Elrond),  and a  dwarf. [And
 we are yet weighed with sorrow,  for our  leader is  lost. Gandalf
 the wizard was lost in Moria.]'(29)                              
   'A dwarf!' said Hathaldir. 'I do not like that.  We do  not have
 dealings with dwarves  since the  evil days.  We cannot  allow him
 to pass.'                                                        
   'But  he  is  an elf-friend  and known  to Elrond,'  said Frodo.
 'Elrond  chose  him  to  be  of  our  company;  and  he  has  been
 valiant and faithful.'                                           
   The  Elves  spoke  together  in  soft  voices,   and  questioned
 Legolas  in  their own  tongue. 'Well  then,' said  Hathaldir. 'We
 will  do  this though  it is  against our  liking. If  Aragorn and
 Legolas will guard him and answer  for him  he shall  go blindfold
 through Lothlorien.                                              
   'But  now  there  is  need  of  haste.  Your  company  must  not
 remain  longer  on  the  ground.  We  have  been keeping  watch on
 the rivers, ever since we saw a  great troop  of orcs  going north

 along  the   skirts  of   the  mountains   towards  Moria   many  days
 ago.  Wolves  were  howling  on  the  wood's   border.  If   you  have
 indeed   come   from   Moria   the   peril   cannot  be   far  behind.
 Tomorrow  you  must  go  far.  The  hobbits  shall  climb up  here and
 stay  with  us  -  we  do  not  fear them!  There is  another [guard's
 nest >  flet >]  talan in  the next  tree. There  the others  must go.
 You  Legolas  must  be  our  security.  And  call  to  us if  aught is
 amiss. Have an eye on that dwarf!'                                       
   Legolas   went   down  again   bringing  Hathaldir's   message;  and
 soon  afterwards   Merry  and   Pippin  climbed   up  onto   the  high
 [?platform].   'There,'  said   Merry,  'we   have  brought   up  your
 blankets  for  you.  The  rest of  our baggage  Aragorn has  hidden in
 a deep drift of old leaves.'                                             
   'There was no need,' said Hathaldir. 'It is chill  in the  tree tops
 in  winter,  though  the  wind  is  southward; but  we have  drink and
 food  to  give  you that  will keep  out night  chills, and  there are
 skins and wraps to spare with us.'                                       
   The   hobbits  accepted   the  second   supper  gladly,   and  soon,
 wrapped  as  warmly  as  they  could,  they  tried  to  get  to sleep.
 Weary  as  they were  it was  not easy  for them,  for hobbits  do not
 like  heights  and  do  not sleep  upstairs (even  when they  have any
 upstairs, which is rare). The flet was not at all to their  liking. It
 had  no  kerb  or  rail,  and  only a  wind screen  on one  side which
 could be moved and  fixed in  different places.  'I hope  if I  do get
 to sleep I shan't roll off,'  said Pippin.  'Once I  get to  sleep, Mr
 Pippin,'  said Sam,  'I shall  go on  sleeping whether  I roll  off or
 no.'                                                                     
   Frodo  lay for  a while  and looked  at the  stars that  glinted now
 and  again  through  the  thin  roof  of  pale  rustling  leaves above
 him. Sam was  snoring at  his side  before he  himself, lulled  by the
 wind  in  the  leaves  above  and  the  sweet murmur  of the  falls of
 Nimrodel (30) below,  fell into  a sleep  with the  song of  Legolas still
 running  in  his  mind. Two  of the  elves sat  with arms  about their
 knees  speaking  in  whispers;  one  had  gone  down  to  take  up his
 post on one of the lower boughs.                                         
   Late  in  the  night  Frodo  woke.  The  other hobbits  were asleep.
 The  elves  were  gone.  The  last thin  rind of  the waning  moon was
 gleaming dimly in the leaves.  The wind  was still.  A little  way off
 he  heard  a  harsh  laugh and  the tread  of many  feet. Then  a ring
 of  metal.  The  sounds   died  away   southward  going   deeper  into
 the wood.                                                                
   The  grey  hood  of  one  of  the  elves  appeared   suddenly  above
                                                                         
                                                                         j

 the edge of the flet. He  looked at  the hobbits.  'What is  it?' said
 Frodo, sitting up.                                                   
   'Yrch!' said the Elf in a hissing  whisper, and  cast onto  the flet
 the rope-ladder rolled up.                                           
   'Orcs,'  said  Frodo,  'what  are  they  doing?'  But  the  Elf  was
 gone.                                                                
   There  was  no  more  sound',  even  the  leaves were  silent. Frodo
 could  not  sleep.  Thankful  as  he  was  that  they  had   not  been
 caught  upon  the  ground,  he  knew  that  the  trees  offered little
 protection   save   concealment,   if   orcs  discovered   where  they
 were,  and  they  have  a  scent  keen  as hounds.  He drew  out Sting
 and saw it glow like a blue flame, and slowly fade.                  
   [Before  long  Hathaldir  came  back to  the flet  and sat  near the
 edge  with  drawn  bow  and  arrow  in  the  string.  Frodo  rose  and
 crawled  to  the  edge  of the  flet and  peered over.](31) Nonetheless
 the  sense  of  immediate  danger  did  not   leave  him.   Rather  it
 deepened.  He crawled  to the  edge of  the flet  and peered  over. He
 was  almost  sure  he  heard  the  soft  sound  of  stealthy  movement
 in the leaves at the tree's foot far below. Not the elves,  he feared,
 for  the  woodland  folk  were  altogether  noiseless  in  their move-
 ments  (so  quiet  and  deft  as  to  excite  the  admiration  even of
 hobbits).  And  there  seemed  to  be  a  sniffing   noise.  Something
 was  scrabbling  on  the  bark  of  the  tree.  He  lay  looking  down
 holding  his  breath.  Something  was  climbing,  and  breathing  with
 a  soft  hissing  sound.  Then  coming  up  close to  the stem  he saw
 two   pale   eyes.   They   stopped   and  gazed   upwards  unwinking.
 Suddenly  they  turned  away  and  a  shadowy  figure   slipped  round
 the  trunk  and  vanished  on  the  further  side.  Shortly afterwards
 Hathaldir climbed up.                                                
   'There  was  something  in  this  tree  that   I  have   never  seen
 before,' he said. 'Not an orch [sic].  But I  did [not]  shoot because
 I was not sure, and we  dare not  risk battle.  It fled  as soon  as I
 touched  the  tree-stem.  There   was  a   strong  company   of  orcs.
 They  crossed  the  Nimrodel  (curse  them  for  defiling  our  water)
 and  went  on  -  though  they  seemed  to  pick  up  some  scent, and
 halted  for a  while searching  on both  sides of  the path  where you
 sat  last  evening.  We  dare  not  risk  a  battle,  three  against a
 hundred,  and  we  did  not  shoot,  but  Orfin   has  gone   back  by
 secret ways  to our  folk, and  we shall  not let  them return  out of
 Lorien  if  we  can  help  it.  There  will   be  many   elves  hidden
 [?beside]  Nimrodel  ere  another  night  is  gone.  But  now  we  too
 must take the road as soon as it is light.'                          

   Dawn  came  pale  from  the  East.  As the  light grew  it filtered
 through  the  golden  leaves  of  the mallorn,  and chill  though the
 dawn-wind  blew  it  seemed  to  be  sunshine  of  an   early  summer
 morning.  The  pale  blue  sky  peeped  between  the  moving  leaves.
 Climbing  a  slender  branch  up  from  the  flet  Frodo  looked  out
 and  saw  all  the  valley  southward,  eastward  of the  dark shadow
 of the mountains, lying like a sea of fallow  gold tossing  gently in
 the breeze.                                                         
   [When  they  had  eaten  the  sweet  food  of  the  elves,  sparing
 their  own  dwindling  store,]  The  morning  was  still   young  and
 cold  when  /  the  Company  set  out  again,  guided  by  Hathaldir.
 Rhimbron  remained  on  guard   on  the   flet.  Frodo   looked  back
 and   caught   a   gleam   of  white   among  the   grey  tree-stems.
 'Farewell  Nimrodel!  '  said  Legolas.  'Farewell,'  said  Frodo. It
 seemed  to  him  that  he  had  never  heard   a  running   water  so
 musical:  ever  changing  its  note  and  yet  playing ever  the same
 endless music.                                                      
   They  went  some  way  along  the  path  on  the  east [read west](32)
 of  the Blackroot,  but soon  Hathaldir turned  aside into  the trees
 and  halted  on  the bank  under their  shadow. 'There  is one  of my
 people  over  there  on  the other  side,' he  said, 'though  you may
 not see him.  But I  see the  gleam of  his hair  in the  shadow.' He
 gave a call like the low whistle of a bird,  and from  the tree-stems
 an elf stepped  out, clad  in grey,  but with  his hood  thrown back.
 Skilfully Hathaldir  flung over  the stream  to him  a coil  of stout
 grey  rope. He  caught it  and fastened  it to  a tree-stem  near the
 bank.                                                               
   'The  river  has  already  a strong  stream here,'  said Hathaldir.
 'It is not wide; but it is too deep to wade. And it is very  cold. We
 do  not  set  foot  in  Morthond  unless  we  are compelled.  This is
 how  we  cross!  Follow  me!'  Securing  his  end  of  the   rope  to
 another tree, he stepped onto  it and  ran lightly  across, as  if he
 was on a firm path.                                                 
   'I can  walk this  path,' said  Legolas, 'but  only with  care, for
 we  have  not  this  skill  in  Mirkwood; but  the rest  cannot. Must
 they swim?'                                                         
   'No,'  said  Hathaldir.  'We  will  cast  two  more  ropes.  Fasten
 them  to  the  tree  man-high  and  half-high,  and  then  with  care
 they can cross.' The  Elves drew  the strong  grey ropes  taut across
 the  stream.  Then   first  Aragorn   crossed  slowly,   holding  the
 upper  rope.  When it  came to  the hobbits'  turn Pippin went first.
 He  was  light  of  foot  and  went across  with fair  speed, holding

 only with one hand on  the lower  rope. Merry  trying to  rival him
 slipped  for  a  moment  and  hung  over  the  water.  Sam shuffled
 across  slowly  and cautiously  behind Frodo,  looking down  at the
 dark eddying water below  his feet  as if  it was  a chasm  of many
 fathoms deep. Gimli and Boromir came last.                        
   When  they  had  all  crossed  Rhimbron (33) untied  the ends  of the
 ropes and  cast two  back. Then  coiling up  the other  he returned
 to Nimrodel to keep watch in his post.                            
   'Now,'  said  Hathaldir,  'you  have  entered  the   Gore,  Nelen (34)
 we call it, which lies in  the angle  between Blackroot  and Anduin
 the  Great River.  We do  not allow  strangers to  walk here  if we
 can  prevent  it,  nor  to  go  deep  into  the  angle  where  [our
 dwellings are o] we live. As was agreed I shall here  blindfold the
 eyes of Gimli the dwarf;  the others  shall walk  free for  a while
 until we get nearer to our hidden dwellings.'                     
   This  was  not  at  all  to  Gimli's  liking. 'The  agreement was
 made  without  my  consent,' he  said. 'I  will not  walk blindfold
 like a prisoner or traitor. My folk have  ever resisted  the Enemy,
 nor had dealings with  orcs or  any of  his servants.  Neither have
 we done  harm to  the Elves.  I am  no more  likely to  betray your
 secrets than Legolas or any others of the Company.'               
   'You speak truly, I do not doubt,' said  Hathaldir. 'Yet  such is
 our law. I am not master of  the law,  and cannot  set it  aside at
 my own judgement. I have done all that I dared  in letting  you set
 foot in [Nelen >] the Gore.'                                      
   But Gimli was obstinate. He set  his feet  firmly apart  and laid
 his hand upon the haft of his axe. 'I  will go  forward free,  or I
 will  go  back  north  alone,  though  it  be  to  perish   in  the
 wilderness,' he said.                                             
   'You  cannot   depart,'  said   Hathaldir  grimly.   'You  cannot
 cross  Morthond,  and  behind  you  north  are hidden  defences and
 guards  across  the  open  arms  of the  Angle between  the rivers.
 You will be slain before you get nigh them.'  The other  elf fitted
 an arrow to his bow as Gimli drew his axe from his belt.          
   'A plague on dwarves and their stiff necks!' muttered Legolas.
   'Come!' said  Aragorn. 'If  I am  to lead  the Company  you must
 all do as I bid. We will all be blindfold, even Legolas.  That will
 be best, though it will make the journey slow and dull.'          
   Gimli  laughed  suddenly.  'A  merry  troop  of  fools  we  shall
 look!' he said. 'But I will be content, if  only Legolas  shares my
 blindness.'                                                       
   This was little to Legolas' liking.                             

   'Come!'  said  Aragorn.  'Let  us  not  cry  "plague  on  your  stiff
 neck"  also.  But  you  shall  not be  our hostage.  We will  all share
 the necessity alike.'                                                 
   'I shall claim full amends  for every  fall and  stubbed toe,  if you
 do  not  lead us  well,' said  Gimli as  they bound  a cloth  about his
 eyes.                                                                 
   'You  will  not  have  need,'  said  Halthadir.  'We  shall  lead you
 well, and our paths are smooth and green.'                            
   'Alas!  for  the  folly  of these  days,' said  Legolas in  his turn.
 'Here  all  are  enemies  of  the  one  Enemy,  and  yet  I  must  walk
 blind,  while  the  sun  is  shining  in the  woodland under  leaves of
 gold!'                                                                
   'Folly it  may seem,'  said Hathaldir.  'And in  truth in  nothing is
 the  evil  of  the  Enemy  seen  more clear  than in  the estrangements
 that divide us all. Yet so little faith and trust is left that  we dare
 not  endanger  our  dwellings.  We  live  now  in  ever-growing  peril,
 and  our  hands  are  more  often set  to bowstring  than to  harp. The
 rivers  have  long  defended  us,  [but]  they  are  no  longer  a sure
 guard.  For  the  Shadow  has  crept  northward  all  about  our  land.
 Some  speak  [?already]  of  departing,  yet  for  that  maybe   it  is
 already  too  late.  The  mountains  to  the  west  have  an  evil name
 for  us.  To  the  east  the  land  is  waste. It  is rumoured  that we
 cannot  with  safety  go   south  of   the  mountains   through  Rohan,
 and that  even if  we did  pass into  the western  lands the  shores of
 the sea are no longer secure. It is  still said  that there  are havens
 in  the  north  beyond  the  land  of  the  half-high,(35) but where that
 lies we do not know.'                                                 
   'You  might  at  least  guess  now,'  said  Pippin.  'The  havens lie
 west of my land, the Shire.'                                          
   The  elf  looked  at  him  with interest.  'Happy folk  are hobbits,'
 he  said,  'to  dwell  near  Havens  of  Escape.  Tell  me  about them,
 and what the sea is like, of which we sing, but scarce remember.'     
   'I do not know,' said Pippin.  'I have  never seen  it. I  have never
 been  out  of  my  land  before.  And  had  I  known  what   the  world
 was  like  outside,  I  do not  think I  should have  had the  heart to
 leave it.'                                                            
   'Yes,  the  word is  full of  peril, and  dark places,'  said Hathal-
 dir. 'But still there is much  that is  very fair,  and though  love is
 now  mingled  with  grief  it  is  not  the less  deep. And  some there
 are  among  us  who  sing  that  the  Shadow   will  draw   back  again
 and  peace  shall  be.  Yet I  do not  believe that  the world  will be
 again as of old, or the  light of  the sun  as it  was before.  For the

                                             
                                                                       
 Elves  I fear  it will  mean only  a peace  in which  they may  pass to
 the  Sea  unhindered  and  leave  the  middle-earth  for   ever.  Alas!
 for  Lothlorien.  It  would  be  a life  far from  the mellyrn.  But if
 there are mallorn-trees beyond the Sea none have reported it.'         
  As  they  spoke  thus  the   Company  went   slowly  along   paths  in
 the  wood.  Hathaldir  led  them  and  the  other  elf  walked  behind.
 Even  as  Hathaldir  had  said  they  found  the  ground  beneath their
 feet  smooth  and  soft,  and  they  walked  slowly  but  without  fear
 of  hurt  or  fall.(36) Before   long  they   met  many   grey-clad  elves
 going  northward to the outposts.(37) They   brought  news,   some  of
 which   Legolas   interpreted.   The   orcs   had  been   waylaid,  and
 many   destroyed;  the   remainder  had   fled  westward   towards  the
 mountains,  and  were  being  pursued   as  far   as  the   sources  of
 Nimrodel.   The   elves  were   hastening  now   to  guard   the  north
 borders against any new attack.                                        
                                                                       
  I interrupt  the text  here to  introduce a  page of  fearsomely rough
 notes which show my  father thinking  about the  further course  of the
 story  from  approximately this  point. They  begin with  references to
 Cerin Amroth and to 'a green  snowdrop', with  the Elvish  words nifred
 and nifredil. It may well be that this is where the name nifredil arose
 (both nifred 'pallor' and nifredil 'snowdrop' are given under  the stem
 NIK-W in the Etymologies, V.378). Then follows:                      
                                                                       
           News. H[athaldir] says he has spoken much of Elves. What of
  Men? The message spoke of 9. Gandalf. Consternation at news.          
                                                                       
 With  this  cf.  p.  227  and  note  29.  My  father  was  thinking  of
 postponing  the  revelation  of  Gandalf's  fall to  the halt  at Cerin
 Amroth, before he finally decided that it should not be spoken of until
 they came to Caras Galadon.                                            
  There is then a sentence, placed within  brackets, which  is unhappily
 -  since it  is probably  the first  reference my  father ever  made to
 Galadriel - only in  part decipherable:  '[?Lord] of  Galadrim [?and?a]
 Lady and...... [? went] to White Council.' The  remaining notes  are as
 follows:                                                               
                                                                       
            They climb Cerin Amroth. Frodo says [read sees] Anduin far
  away a  glimpse of  Dol Dugol.(38) H[athaldir] says  it is  reoccupied and
  a cloud lowers there.                                                 
    They journey to Nelennas.(39)                                       
    Lord and Lady clad in white, with u hite hair.  Piercing eyes  like a
  lance in starlight.(40) Lord says he knows their quest but won't speak
  of it.                                                                
    They speak [of] Gandalf. Song of Elves.                             
    Of the [?harbour] to Legolas and aid to Gimli. Beornings.(41)       
    Leave Lothlorien. Parting of ways at Stonehills.                    

               
                                                                   
 I return now to the draft text.                                    
                                                                   
  'Also,'  said  Hathaldir,  'they  bring  me  a  message   from  the
 Lord  of  the  Galadrim.  You  may  all walk  free. He  has received
 messages  from  Elrond,  who  begs  for help  and friendship  to you
 each  and  all.'  He removed  the bandage  from Gimli's  eyes. 'Your
 pardon,'  he  said  bowing.  'But  now look  on us  nonetheless with
 friendly eyes. Look  and be  glad, for  you are  the first  dwarf to
 behold  the  sun  upon  the  trees  of  Nelen-Lorien  since  Durin's
 day!'                                                              
  As  the  bandage  dropped  from  his  eyes  Frodo  looked  up. They
 were standing in  an open  space. To  the left  stood a  great mound
 covered with a sward of grass, as  green as  if it  were springtime.
 Upon  it as  a double  crown grew  two circles  of trees:  the outer
 had  a  bark  of  snowy  white  and were  leafless but  beautiful in
 their  slender  and  shapely  nakedness;  the  inner  were  mallorn-
 trees  of  great  height,  still  arrayed in  gold. High  amid their
 branches was a white flet. At their feet and all about the  sides of
 the  hill  the  grass  was  studded  with  small  golden  starshaped
 flowers,  and  among  them nodding  on slender  stalks flowers  of a
 green  so  pale (42) that  it gleamed  white against  the rich  green of
 the  grass.  Over  all the  sky was  blue and  the sun  of afternoon
 slanted among the tree-stems.                                      
  'You are come to Coron [written above: Kerin] Amroth.(43)         
 For  this  is  the mound  of Amroth,  and here  in happier  days his
 house  was  built.  Here bloom  the winter  flowers in  the unfading
 grass: the yellow elanor (44) and the  pale nifredil.  Here we  will rest
 a while, and come to the houses of the Galadrim (45) at dusk.           
  They  cast  themselves  on  the  soft grass  at the  mound's foot;(46)
 but after a while Hathaldir  took Frodo  and they  went to  the hill
 top, and climbed  up to  the high  flet. Frodo  looked out  East and
 saw  not  far  away  the  gleam  of  the Great  River which  was the
 border  of  Lorien.  Beyond the  land seemed  flat and  empty, until
 in  the distance  it rose  again dark  and drear.  The sun  that lay
 upon all the lands between seemed not to lie upon it.              
  'There  lies  the  fastness  of  Southern  Mirkwood,'  said Hathal-
 dir. 'For the most part it is a forest of dark pine and close  fir -
 but amidst it stands the black  hill Dol-Dugol,  where for  long the
 Necromancer  had  his  [? fort].  We  fear it  is now  rehabited and
 threatens,  for  his  power  is  now  sevenfold.  A dark  cloud lies
 often  above  it.  [?? Fear  of the  time is]  war upon  our eastern
 borders.'                                                          

    The  draft  text  continues ('The  sun had  sunk behind  the mountains')
  without  a  break,  whereas  in  FR   a  new   chapter,  'The   Mirror  of
  Galadriel', now begins; and I  also pause  in the  narrative here  (it was
  not long before my father introduced  this division).  It will  be noticed
  that towards the end of the earliest 'Lothlorien' material given  thus far
  the  narrative  is  less  advanced  towards  the  final form,  and notably
  absent  is  Frodo's  sight  southward  from  Cerin  Amroth  of 'a  hill of
  many mighty trees, or a  city of  green towers',  Caras Galad(h)on  (FR p.
  366).                                                                     
                                                                           
    The next text of 'Lothlorien' is a good  clear manuscript,  thus titled,
  with a fair amount of  alteration in  the process  of composition;  but it
  cannot be entirely separated off from the initial  drafting as  a distinct
  'phase' in the writing  of the  story, for  it seems  certain that  at the
  beginning  of  the chapter  the draft  and the  fair copy  overlapped (see
  note  14). There  seems nothing  to show,  however, that  the rest  of the
  new text actually overlapped with the drafts, and it is  in any  case most
  convenient to treat it separately.                                        
    The  text  of  'Lothlorien'  in  FR  was  now  for  the  most  part very
  closely  approached,  the  chief  differences   of  substance   being  the
  absence  of  all  passages  referring  to  or implying  Aragorn's previous
  knowledge   of   Lothlorien,(47) and the  meeting   of  the   Company  with
  the Elves coming up from the  south shortly  after their  rest at  noon on
  the first day of their journey from Nimrodel (see  note 37).  The original
  story was still followed in various minor points, as  in its  being Pippin
  and  not  Merry who  speaks to  Haldir (replacing  Hathaldir of  the draft
  text, see note  28) of  the Havens  (p. 232);  Sam does  not refer  to his
  uncle  Andy  (FR  p.  361),  and  it  was  still  in his  arm that  he was
  wounded in Moria (p. 201).(48)                                            
    By an addition to the text that looks as  if it  belongs with  the first
  writing of the  manuscript the  Dimrill Stair  acquires its  later meaning
  (see p. 164): ' "Yonder is the  Dimrill Stair,"  said Aragorn  pointing to
  the falls. "Down the  deep-cloven way  that climbs  beside the  torrent we
  should have come, if fortune had been kinder" ' (FR p. 347).              
    The Silverlode  was at  first named  Blackroot or  Morthond, but  in the
  course  of  the  writing  of  the  manuscript  the name  became Silverlode
  (the  Elvish  name   Kelebrant  being   added  afterwards).   The  Company
  'kept to the old path on the west side of the Blackroot'  (FR p.  360; cf.
  note  32);  but  ten  lines  later Haldir  says, in  the text  as written,
  'Silverlode is already a strong stream  here'. It  was presumably  at this
  juncture  that  my father  decided on  the transposition  of the  names of
  the  northern  and  southern rivers  (see note  36), a  transposition that
  had already taken place in the  initial drafting  of 'Farewell  to Lorien'
  (p. 279).                                                                 
    One of Haldir's brothers is still called Orfin as in the original draft;
  at one occurrence only, he is changed to  Orofin, and  in the  drafting of

                         
                                                                            
  'Farewell  to  Lorien'  he  is Orofin (p.  279; FR  Orophin). The  other, in
  the  draft  text  Rhimbron,  is   now  Romrin,   becoming  Rhomrin   in  the
  course of the writing of the manuscript.                                   
     The  Elvish  name  for  'the Gore'  is here  Narthas, where  the original
  text  (p.   231)  has   Nelen  (replacing   Nelennas):  'you   have  entered
  Narthas or the Gore as you would say, for it is  the land  that lies  like a
  spear-head (49) between   the  arms   of  Silverlode   and  Anduin   the  Great,
  and  'I  have done  much in  letting you  set foot  in Narthas'.  But Haldir
  here  says  also:  'The  others  may  walk free  for a  while until  we come
  nearer  to  the  Angle, Nelen,  where we dwell', where the  original draft
  has  'until  we  get nearer  to our  hidden dwellings';  and when  they come
  to Kerin Amroth (as it is now written) he tells Gimli that he is  'the first
  dwarf  to  behold  the  trees of  Nelen-Lorien since  Durin's Day!'  - where
  the original draft has Nelen-Lorien likewise (p. 234).                     
     This seems to  show that  in the  first stage  my father  intended Nelen,
  Nelen-Lorien,  'the  Gore', 'the  Gore of  Lorien', as  the name  for Lorien
  between  the  rivers,  without  devising  an Elvish  name for  the southward
  region  where  the  Elves  of  Lorien  actually  dwelt;  while in  the stage
  represented  here  Narthas  'the  Gore'  is  the  larger  region,  and Nelen
  'the  Angle'  the  smaller,  the  point  of  the  triangle  or  tip  of  the
  spearhead. If this is so, when  Hathaldir/Haldir first  spoke of  'the trees
  of   Nelen-Lorien'  the   name  bore   a  different   sense  from   what  he
  intended by the same words in the present manuscript.(50)                  
     In the first sentence of this chapter  in this  manuscript Trotter  is so
  named,  as  he  was  throughout  the  preceding  one  (p.  204);   this  was
  changed  at  once   to  Aragorn,   and  he   is  Aragorn   as  far   as  the
  Company's   coming   to   the   eaves   of   the   Golden  Wood,   where  he
  becomes  Elfstone  in  the  text  as   written.(51) Subsequently   Aragorn,  so
  far  as  it  went,  was  changed  to  Ingold,  and  Elfstone   was  likewise
  changed to Ingold; then Ingold was changed back to Elfstone.(52)           
                                                                            
     There  remain  to  notice  some  remarkable  pencilled  notes  that occur
  on pages of this manuscript. The first is written  on the  back of  the page
  (which  is  marked  as  being  an insertion  into the  text) that  bears the
  Song of Nimrodel, and reads:                                               
     Could not Balrog be Saruman? Make battle on Bridge be between           
     Gandalf and Saruman? Then Gandalf... clad in white.                     
  The  illegible  words  might  conceivably  be  comes  out.  This  was struck
  through;  it had  no further  significance or  repercussion, but  remains as
  an  extraordinary  glimpse  into  reflections that  lie beneath  the written
  evidence  of  the  history  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings (and  the thought,
  equally baldly expressed, would reappear: p. 422).                         
     A  second  rejected  note  was  written  at   some  later   time  against
  Haldir's  words  'they  bring  me  a  message  from  the  Lord  and  Lady of
  the Galadrim':                                                             
     Lord? If Galadriel is alone and is wife of Elrond.                      

                   
                                                                       
    A third note, again struck through, is written on the back of the
 inserted page that carries the preliminary draft of Frodo's perceptions
 of Lothlorien (note 46):                                               
 Elf-rings                                                              
 .... [illegible word or name]                                          
 The power of the Elf-rings must fade if One Ring is destroyed.         

                              NOTES.                                      
                                                                         
  1. On 'the black springs of Morthond' see p. 166.                       
  2. At this point, then, my father  conceived of  the Elves  of Lothlorien
     as   dwelling   underground,   like   the   Elves  of   Mirkwood.  Cf.
     Legolas'  later words  on p.  225: 'It  is said  that Linglorel  had a
     house built in branches  of a  tree; for  that was  the manner  of the
     Elves of Lorien,  and may  be yet...  And our  people [i.e.  the Elves
     of  Mirkwood]  did  not  delve  in  the  ground  or  build  fastnesses
     before the Shadow came.'                                             
  3. This  passage  was first  used at  the end  of the  preceding chapter,
     'Moria (ii)': see p. 204 and note 20.                                
  4. On  the  emergence  of  the three  peaks (the  Mountains of  Moria) in
     the new version of 'The Ring Goes South' see p. 166.                 
  5. The word west is perfectly clear, but can only  be a  slip; FR  has of
     course  east.  The same  slip occurs  in the  first emergence  of this
     passage at the end of 'Moria (ii)' (p.  203), and  it occurs  again in
     the fair copy of 'Lothlorien'.                                       
  6. This  passage,  from  'Northward  the  Dale  ran  up  into  a  glen of
     shadows, was first used at the end of Moria (ii): see pp. 203-4.     
  7. For the first appearance of Kheledzaram see p. 166.                  
  8. In  FR  Legolas  did not  go down  with Gimli  to look  in Mirrormere.
  9. The word southwest  is clear  (and occurs  again in  the fair  copy of
     'Lothlorien'), yet is obviously a slip; d. note 5.                   
 10. The  words  Now  they  went  on  silently  were  struck  out  emphati-
     cally, but they are obviously necessary.                             
 11. It is not told in the original text of 'Moria (ii)' (p. 194)  that Sam
     received  any  wound  in  the  Chamber of  Mazarbul; this  story first
     appears in the fair copy of that chapter (see p. 201).               
 12. The text becomes illegible for a couple  of lines,  but elements  of a
     description of the wood can be made out.                             
 13. This  passage possibly  suggests that  at this  stage the  Company did
     not encounter Elves on the first night. The 'several (2 -  3) pleasant
     days' are clearly the days  of their  journey through  Lothlorien, not
     the days they spent at 'Angle' (cf.  the plot  outline, p.  207: 'Dec.
     15,  16,  17  they  journey  to  Angle  between Anduin  and Blackroot.
     There they remain long').                                            

 That   they   were   now   nearly   300   miles   south   of  Rivendell
 accords  precisely with  the First  Map: see  Map II  on p.  305, where
 the  distance  from  Rivendell  to  the  confluence  of  Silverlode and
 Anduin  on  the original  scale (squares  of 2  cm. side,  2 cm.  = 100
 miles)  is  just  under six  centimetres measured  in a  straight line.
 Aragorn's  reckoning,  when  they  came  to  the  eaves  of  the Golden
 Wood,  that  they  had  come  'barely  five  leagues  from  the Gates',
 does  not  accord  with the  First Map,  but that  map can  scarcely be
 used as a check on such small distances.                               
14. It seems that  my father  began making  a fair  copy of  the chapter
 when  the  draft  narrative  had  gone  no   further  than   the  point
 where  Frodo  and  Sam  began  to  lag  behind  as  the   Company  went
 down  from  Dimrill  Dale.  When  he  came  to  this  point  he stopped
 writing  out  the new  manuscript in  ink, but  continued on  in pencil
 on  the  same  paper,  as  far  as  Legolas'  words  'Alas  that  it is
 winter!'  He  then  overwrote this  further passage  in ink  and erased
 the  pencil;  and then  went back  to further  drafting on  rough paper
 - which is why there is this gap in the initial  narrative, and  why it
 takes  up again  at the  words 'Under  the night  the trees  stood tall
 before  them...'  Overlapping  of  draft and  fair copy,  often writing
 the  preliminary  draft  in  pencil  on  the  fair copy  manuscript and
 then  erasing  it or  overwriting it  in ink,  becomes a  very frequent
 mode of composition in later chapters.                                 
15. In FR these last words are given to Gimli, for Aragorn in  the later
 story  had  of  course  good  reason  to  know  that  Elves  did indeed
 still dwell in Lothlorien.                                             
16. In a preliminary draft of Legolas' words here they take this form:
        So it is said amongst us in Mirkwood, though it is long since we
 came  so  far.  But  if  so  they  dwell  deep  in  the  woods  down in
 Angle, Bennas between Blackroot and Anduin.                            
      The name Bennas occurs only here in narrative, but  it is  found in
 the   Etymologies,  V.352,   under  the   root  BEN   'corner,  angle':
 Noldorin  bennas  'angle'.   The  second   element  is   Noldorin  nass
 'point; angle' (V.374 - 5).                                            
17. The  passage beginning  'A mile  within the  wood...' (of  which the
 first germ is found on p. 221) appears also in a superseded draft:     
        A  mile  within  the   wood  they   came  upon   another  stream
 flowing   down  swiftly   from  the   tree-clad  slopes   that  climbed
 back  towards   the  Mountains   to  join   the  Blackroot   (on  their
 left),  and  over   its  dark   hurrying  waters   there  was   now  no
 bridge.                                                                
          'Here is the Taiglin,' said Legolas. 'Let us  wade over  if we
 can.  Then  we  shall  have  water  behind  us  and  on  the  east, and
 only  on  the  west  towards  the  Mountains  shall  we  have  much  to
 fear.'                                                                 
      In the consecutive narrative at this point the name  Taiglin (from

      The  Silmarillion:  tributary  of  Sirion  in   Beleriand)  underwent
      many changes, but  it is  clear that  all these  forms belong  to the
      same time - i.e., the final name had been  achieved before  the first
      complete draft of the  chapter was  done (see  note 30).  Taiglin was
      at  once  replaced  by  Linglor,  and  then  Linglor  was  changed to
      Linglorel,  the  form  as  first  written  shortly afterwards  in the
      manuscript  and  as  found  in  the   rough  workings   for  Legolas'
      song.  This  was  succeeded  by   Nimladel,  Nimlorel,   and  finally
      Nimrodel.                                                           
  18. The word actually written was waters.                               
  19. Linglorel  was  altered  in  pencil,  first to  Nimlorel and  then to
      Nimrodel (see note 17). I do not further notice  the changes  in this
      case,  but  give  the  name  in  the  form as  it was  first written.
  20. the   mountains   changed   to   the   Black  Mountains   (the  White
      Mountains FR).                                                      
  21. Ammalas changed in pencil to Amroth; see p. 223.                    
  22. In a separate draft for this passage the reading here is:  'Hence the
      folk of Lorien were called Galadrim, the Tree-folk (Ornelie)'.     
  23. Aragorn  was  here  changed  later to  Elfstone, and  at some  of the
      subsequent occurrences; see p. 236 and note 52.                     
  24. Written in the margin here: 'Name of  the tree  is mallorn'.  This is
      where my father first  wrote the  name; and  it enters  the narrative
      immediately below.                                                  
  25. On daro! 'stop, halt' see the Etymologies, V.353, stem DAR.         
  26. A detached (earlier) draft describes the event differently:         
         Turning  aside  from  the  road  they  went-into  the  shadows  of
      the  deeper  wood  westward  of  the  river, and  there not  far from
      the  falls  of Linglorel  they found  a group  of tall  strong trees.
      Their  lowest  boughs  were  above  the  reach  of   Boromir's  arms;
      but  they  had  rope  with  them.  Cast[ing]  an  end  about  a bough
      of  the  greatest of  the trees  Legolas... up  and climbed  into the
      darkness.                                                           
         He  was  not  long   aloft.  'The   tree-branches  form   a  great
      crown  near the  top,' he  said, 'and  there is  a hollow  where even
      Boromir might find some  rest. But  in the  next tree  I think  I saw
      a sheltered platform. Maybe elves still come here.'                 
         At  that  moment   a  clear   voice  above   them  spoke   in  the
      elven-tongue,  but  Legolas  drew  himself  hastily  [?close]  to the
      tree-bole.  'Stand  still',  he  said,  'and do  not speak  or move.'
      Then  he  called  back  into  the  shadows  above,  [? answering]  in
      his [?own] tongue.                                                  
         Frodo  did  not  understand  the  words,  for  [the speech  of the
      wood-elves   east   of   the  mountains   differed  much   from]  the
      language  was  the  old  tongue  of  the  woods and  not that  of the
      western   elves  which   was  in   those  days   used  as   a  common
      speech among many folk.                                             

       There is a marginal direction to alter the story to  a form  in which
       the  voice  from the  tree speaks  as Legolas  jumps up.  The passage
       which  I  have  bracketed   is  not   marked  in   any  way   in  the
       manuscript,  but  is  an  example  of  my  father's  common  practice
       when  writing at  speed of  abandoning a  sentence and  rephrasing it
       without striking out the first version.                              
         For  a  previous  reference  to  the  'Common  Speech' see  p. 223;
       now  it is  further said  that the  Common Speech  was the  tongue of
       'the western elves'.                                                 
  27.  The words by the Dimrill  Stair still  refer to  the pass  (later the
       Redhorn  Pass or  Redhorn Gate):  see p.  164. FR  has here  (p. 357)
       up the Dimrill Stair.                                                
  28.  In  a  rejected  draft for  this passage,  in content  otherwise very
       much  the  same  as that  given, none  of the  three Elves  of Lorien
       speak  any  language  but their  own, and  Legolas has  to translate.
       The  three  Elves  are  here called  Rhimbron, [Rhimlath  >] Rhimdir,
       and Haldir:  when this  last name  replaced Hathaldir  it was  thus a
       reversion.  -  Hathaldir   the  Young   was  the   name  of   one  of
       Barahir's companions on Dorthonion (V.282).                          
  29.  This  passage  was  enclosed  in square  brackets in  the manuscript,
       and subsequently struck out. It is explicit later  (p. 247)  that the
       loss of Gandalf was not spoken of at this time.                      
  30.  The  name  Nimrodel now  appears in  the text  as written;  see notes
       17 and 19.                                                           
  31.  These  two  sentences  are  not  marked  off  in   any  way   in  the
       manuscript,  but  were  nonetheless  obviously  rejected at  once. In
       the narrative that follows  Hathaldir did  not climb  up to  the flet
       until  Gollum had  disappeared (as  in FR,  p. 360);  Frodo's peering
       over  the edge  is repeated;  and 'Nonetheless  the sense  of immedi-
       ate danger did  not leave  him' must  follow on  the fading  of Sting
       at the end of the previous paragraph.                                
  32.  'They  went  back  to  the  old  path  on  the   west  side   of  the
       Silverlode', FR p. 360 (second edition: 'to the path that  still went
       on  along  the  west  side  of the  Silverlode'). Since  the Nimrodel
       flowed in from the right, and they had to cross it, the road  or path
       from  Moria  was on  the right  (or west)  of the  Blackroot (Silver-
       lode), which was on their left, as is expressly stated (see note 17);
       the word east here, though perfectly clear, is therefore a  mere slip
       (cf. notes 5 and 9).                                                 
  33.  Earlier  (p.  230)  Rhimbron  has  remained  at  the  flet,  and  the
       Company   is   guided   by  Hathaldir   alone;  now   Rhimbron,  like
       Rumil  in  FR  (pp.  360 -  1), comes  with Hathaldir  as far  as the
       crossing  of  the  river  and  then  returns.  It  is  seen  from the
       manuscript  that  my  father  perceived  here  the  need   for  Rhim-
       bron's presence at the crossing.                                     

34.  A rejected form here was Nelennas;  cf. Bennas  'Angle' in  note 16,
 and  stem N  E L  'three' in  the Etymologies,  V.376. On  Nelennas see
 note 39.                                                               
35.  Contrast Hathaldir's words earlier (p.  227): 'We  had not  heard of
 hobbits  before'  (i.e.  before  they received  tidings of  the Company
 from  the  messengers  of  Elrond).  At the  corresponding point  in FR
 (p. 357) Haldir said: 'We  had not  heard of  - hobbits,  of halflings,
 for  many  a  long  year,  and  did  not  know  that  any yet  dwelt in
 Middle-earth.'                                                         
36.  An isolated passage, dashed down  on a  sheet of  the same  paper as
 that  used  throughout  and  clearly  belonging   to  the   same  time,
 shows the first beginning  of the  passage in  FR p.  364, 'As  soon as
 he  set foot  upon the  far bank  of Silverlode  a strange  feeling had
 come upon him...':                                                     
       As soon as they pass Silverlode  into Angle  Frodo has  a curious
 sense  of  walking  in   an  older   world-  unshadowed.   Even  though
 'wolves  howled   on  the   wood's  border'   they  had   not  entered.
 Evil  had  been  heard  of,  Orcs  had  even  set  foot  in  the woods,
 but  it  had  not  yet  stained  or  dimmed  the  air.  There  was some
 secret  power  of  cleanness  and  beauty  in  Lorien.  It  was winter,
 but  nothing  was  dead,  only  in  a  phase  of  beauty. He  saw never
 a  broken  twig  or  disease  or  fungus.  The  fallen leaves  faded to
 silver and there was no smell of decay.                                
      A part of this appears a little later in FR, p. 365, where however
 the  'undecaying'  nature  of  Lothlorien  is  expressed in  terms less
 immediate:  'In  winter  here  no  heart  could  mourn  for  summer  or
 for  spring.  No  blemish  or sickness  or deformity  could be  seen in
 anything that grew upon the earth.' Cf. note 46.                       
       Silverlode has here replaced Blackroot: see p.  235. On  the same
 page as this passage are the following notes:                          
       Transpose    names    Blackroot   and    Silverlode.   Silverlode
 dwarfish Kibilnala elvish Celeb(rind)rath.                             
      The  meaning  of  this  is seen  from Boromir's  words in  the new
 version  of  'Moria  (i)',  p. 177:  'Or we  could go  on far  into the
 South   and   come   at   length   round   the  Black   Mountains,  and
 crossing  the rivers  Isen and  Silverlode enter  Ond from  the regions
 nigh  the  sea.' The  two river-names  being transposed,  Silverlode in
 this speech of Boromir's  in the  earlier chapter  was changed  at this
 time to  Blackroot (p.  187 note  1); and  in the  new version  of 'The
 Ring  Goes  South'  the  Dwarvish  name  of  the  northern   river  was
 changed from Buzundush to Kibil-nala (p. 167 and note 22).             
       In the original text  of 'The  Ring Goes  South' occurs  by later
 substitution  the  form  Celebrin  (VI.434  note   15).  For   rath  in
 Celeb(rind)rath  (and  also  rant  in  the  later  name  Celebrant) see
 the Etymologies, V.383, stem R A T.                                      

  37.  The  following  passage  was  rewritten several  times. In  the original
       form this dialogue occurs:                                              
            'What is this?' said one of the Elves, looking in wonder at        
         Legolas.  'By  his  raiment  of  green and  brown [?he  is an]  Elf of
       the North. Since when have we taken our kindred prisoner,               
         Hathaldir? '                                                          
            'I  am  not  a  prisoner,'  said  Legolas. 'I  am only  showing the
       dwarf how to walk straight without the help of eyes.'                   
       Later, a passage was inserted making the blindfold march longer:        
         All  that  day  they  marched  on  by   gentle  stages.   Frodo  could
       hear  the  wind  rustling  in  the  leaves  and  the  river away  to the
       right  murmuring  at  times.  He  had  felt  the  sun  on his  face when
       they  passed  across  a  glade,  as he  guessed. After  a rest  and food
       at  noon,  they  went  on  again,  turning  it  seemed  away   from  the
       river.  After  a  little  while they  heard voices  about them.  A great
       company  of  elves  had  come  up  silently,   and  were   now  speaking
       to Hathaldir.                                                           
       In  the  corresponding  passage  in  FR  (p.  364)  they  had  passed  a
       day  and  a  night  blindfold,  and  it was  at noon  on the  second day
       that  they  met  the  Elves  coming  from  the  south and  were released
       from their blindfolds.                                                  
  38.  Dol Dugol occurs in 'Moria (i)', p. 178.                               
  39.  'They  journey  to  Nelennas':  at  an  earlier  occurrence  of Nelennas
       (see p. 231 and note 34) it was changed to Nelen, 'the Gore'.           
       Since  they  are  now  deep  in  'the  Gore',  Nelennas  perhaps  refers
       here to the city (Caras Galadon); see p. 261 note 1.                    
  40.  It  is notable  that the  Lady of  Lothlorien at  first had  white hair;
       this was still the case in the first actual narratives of the sojourn of
       the Company in Caras Galadon (pp. 246, 256).                            
  41.  For explanation of these references see p. 248 and note 15.             
  42.  The  actual  text here  is extremely  confused, and  I set  it out  as a
       characteristic,  if extreme,  example of  my father's  way of  writing .
       when   actually  composing   new  narrative   (nothing  is   struck  out
       except  as  indicated):
       ...   the   grass   was   studded   with   small  golden   [struck  out:
       flowers]   starshaped   and  slanting   [?leaved]  and   starshaped  and
       among  them  on  slender  nodding  on  slender   stalks  flowers   of  a
       green so pale...                                                        
  43.  In   the   Etymologies,   V.365,   stem  KOR,   both  coron   and  cerin
       appear as Noldorin words, the latter being the equivalent of            
       Quenya korin 'circular enclosure' (cf. the korin of elms in which       
       Meril-i-Turinqi  dwelt  in  The  Book  of  Lost  Tales,  where  the word
       is defined  (1.16) as  'a great  circular hedge,  be it  of stone  or of
       thorn  or  even  of  trees,  that  encloses  a  green  sward').  But the
       meaning   of   cerin  in   Cerin  Amroth   is  certainly   'mound',  and
       indeed long afterwards my father translated the word as 'circular       

      mound  or  artificial  hill'. -  Amroth has  now replaced  Ammalas in
      the text as written; see note 21.                                   
  44. This is the first appearance of  the name  elanor, which  replaced at
      the time of writing another name, yri (see note 45).                
  45. After  'the  houses  of  the Galadrim'  my father  wrote Bair  am Yru
      (see note 44), but struck it out.                                   
  46. A  page  inserted   into  the   manuscript  (but   obviously  closely
      associated in  time with  the surrounding  text) gives  the primitive
      drafting for  the passage  in FR  p. 365  beginning 'The  others cast
      themselves  down  upon   the  fragrant   grass'  and   continuing  to
      Sam's  words about  the 'elvishness'  of Lorien.  The latter  part of
      this is of an extreme roughness, but I give  the rider  in full  as a
      further  exemplification  of  the actual  nature of  much preliminary
      drafting:                                                           
         The  others  cast  themselves  down  on  the  fragrant  grass, but
      Frodo  stood  for  a while  lost in  wonder. Again  it seemed  to him
      as  if  he  had  stepped  through  a  high  window  that looked  on a
      vanished  world.  It  was  a  winter  that did  not mourn  for summer
      or  for  spring,  but  reigned  in  its  own  season   beautiful  and
      eternal  and  perennial.  He  saw  no  sign  of  blemish  or disease,
      sickness  or  deformity,  in  anything  that  grew  upon  the  earth,
      nor did he see any such thing in [Nelen o] the heart of Lorien.     
         Sam  too  stood  by  him  with  a  puzzled expression  rubbing his
      eyes as if he  was not  sure that  he was  awake. 'It's  sunlight and
      bright  day,'  he  muttered.  'I  thought  Elves  were  all  for moon
      and  stars,  but  this  is more  Elvish than  anything in  any tale.'
      and caught his breath for the  sight was  fair in  itself but  it had
      a quality different to any that he felt  before [variant:  had beside
      a  beauty  that  the  common  speech  could  not  name].  The  shapes
      of  all  that  he  saw All  that he  saw was  shapely but  its shapes
      seemed  at  once  clearcut  and  as   if  it   had  been   but  newly
      conceived  and  drawn  with  swift  skill  swift  and  [?living]  and
      ancient  as  if  [it]  had  endured  for ever.  The hues  were green,
      gold  and  blue  white   but  fresh   as  if   he  but   that  moment
      perceived them and gave them names.                                 
  47. Thus the entire  passage (FR  pp. 352  - 3)  in which  Boromir demurs
      at  entering  the  Golden  Wood   and  is   rebuked  by   Aragorn  is
      absent, as also is the conclusion of the chapter in FR, from  'At the
      hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing  still and  silent...' (pp.
      366-7).                                                             
        This  is  a  convenient point  to mention  a small  textual corrup-
      tion in the published form of this chapter (FR p.  359). In  the fair
      copy manuscript Pippin says: 'I hope, if I  do get  to sleep  in this
      bird-loft,  that  I  shan't  roll  off'; but  in the  typescript that
      followed,  not  made  by  my father,  bird-loft became  bed-loft, and
      so remains.                                                         

                               
                                                                           
  48.    A   few   other   details  worth   recording  are   collected  here:
         wood-elves  (p.  222)  remains,  where  FR  (p.  353)   has  Silvan
         Elves.                                                              
         the  common  speech  (p.  223)  remains,  where  FR  (p.   353)  has
         the Westron Speech.
         in  ordinary  speech   (p.  227)   becomes  in   ordinary  language,
         changed   later   to   in   the   Common   Tongue  (in   the  Common
         Language FR p. 357).                                               
          Hathaldir's  words  about  hobbits (p.  227) are  scarcely changed:
         We  had not  heard of  - hobbits  before, and  never until  now have
         we seen one; see  note 35.
         and that even if u e did pass into the western lands the  shores of
         the sea are no longer secure in the original draft (p.  232) becomes
         and  the  mouths  of  the  Great River  are held  by the  Enemy (are
         watched       by       the       Enemy,       FR       p.      363).
         there  are  still havens  to be  found, far  north and  west, beyond
         the  land  of  the  half-high  (cf. p.  232 and  note 35),  where FR
         (p. 363) has  havens of  the High  Elves... beyond  the land  of the
         Halfings.                                                            
         near  Havens  of  Escape  (p.  232)  was   at first   retained,  but
         changed at once to near the shores of the Sea, as in FR.           
  49.    'Narthas or the Gore as you would say, for it is the land  that lies
         like a spear-head': the word for (preserved  in FR  p. 361)  is used
         because  gore,   Old  English   gara  (in   modern  use   meaning  a
         wedge-shaped piece of  cloth, but  in Old  English an  angular point
         of land) was related  to gar  'spear', the  connection lying  in the
         shape of the spear-head.                                           
  50.    Later,  Narthas  and  Nelen-Lorien  were  changed  to the  Naith (of
         Lorien),  though in  'the Angle,  Nelen, where  we dwell'  Nelen was
         left to stand. - Dol Dugol, retained from the original  draft, with
         the  reference to  the Necromancer  (p. 234),  was later  changed to
         Dol Dughul.                                                       
  51.    This is to be  connnected with  the interruption  in the  writing of
         the fair copy manuscript (note 14).                                
  52.    In fact, there is a good deal of variation, since when  making these
         name-changes  my  father  worked  through  the  manuscripts  rapidly
         and  missed  occurrences. Thus  in this  manuscript, in  addition to
         Aragorn  >  Ingold  >  Elfstone  and Elfstone  > Ingold  > Elfstone,
         there  is  found  also:  Aragorn  >  Elfstone;  Elfstone  >  Ingold;
         Elfstone   >   Ingold   >   Aragorn;   Elfstone   >   Aragorn.  This
         apparently  patternless   confusion  can   be  explained:   see  pp.
         277  -  8.  The  name  Ingold for  Aragorn has  been met  before, in
         later emendation to the text of Gandalf s letter at Bree (p.  80 and
         note 17).                                                          

                                 XIII.                               
                                                                       
                               GALAD RIEL.                              
                                                                       
 I have divided the draft manuscript of the 'Lothlorien' story  into two
 parts, although at this stage my father continued without break  to the
 end of FR Book II Chapter 7, 'The  Mirror of  Galadriel'; and  I return
 now to the point where I  left it  on p.  234. From  the coming  of the
 Company to Cerin Amroth the draft is  in thick,  soft pencil,  and very
 difficult.                                                             
                                                                       
  The   sun   had   sunk   behind   the   mountains,  and   the  shadows
 were  falling  in  the  wood,  when  they  went  on  again.  Now  their
 paths  went  deep  into  dense  wood  where  already  a  grey  dusk had
 gathered.  It  was  nearly  night  under  the  trees  when   they  came
 out  suddenly  under  a  pale  evening  sky  pierced  by  a  few  early
 stars.  There  was  a  wide  treeless  space running  in a  vast circle
 before  them.  Beyond  that  was  a  deep grass-clad  dike, and  a high
 green  wall   beyond.  [?   Rising]  ground   inside  the   circle  was
 [?? thick with] mallorn-trees, the tallest  they had  yet seen  in that
 land.  The  highest  must  have  been  nearly  200  feet  high,  and of
 great  girth.  They  had  no  branches  lower  than  3   fathoms  above
 their  roots.  In  the  upper  branches  amid  the  leaves  hundreds of
 lights gold and white and pale green were shining.                     
  'Welcome  to   Caras  Galadon,'   he  said,   'the  city  of  Nelennas
 which  [?mayhap]  in  your  tongue  is  called   Angle.(1) But   we  must
 go round; the gates do not look north.'                                
  There  was  a  white  paved   road  running   round  the   circuit  of
 the  walls.  On  the  south  side  there  was  a  bridge over  the dike
 leading to  great gates  set on  the side  where the  ends of  the wall
 overlapped.   They   passed   within   into   deep  shadow   where  the
 two  green  walls  ended  [? in  a] lane.  They saw  no folk  on guard,(2)
 but  there  were  many  soft voices  overhead, and  in the  distance he
 [sc. Frodo] heard  a voice  falling clear  out of  the air  above them.
                                                                       
  The  original  pencilled text  continues for  some distance  from this
 point, but my father  partly overwrote  it in  ink, and  (more largely)
 erased it wholly before the new text was  set down  in its  place. Here
 and there bits of the original text were retained, and where it was not
 erased but overwritten a name or a phrase  can be  made out.  There was

  no long interval between the two forms of the  text; my  father may  in any
  case have rewritten this section mainly because it was so nearly illegible.
                                                                            
    They   passed   along   many   paths   and   climbed   many   flights  of
  steps,  until  they  saw  before  them  amid  a   wide  lawn   a  fountain.
  It  sprang  high  in  the  air and  fell in  a wide  basin of  silver, from
  which  a  white  stream  ran  away  down   the  hill.   Hard  by   stood  a
  great  tree.  At  its  foot  stood  three  tall  elves.  They were  clad in
  grey   mail   and   from   their   shoulders   hung   long   white  cloaks.
  'Here   dwell  Keleborn   and  Galadriel,(3) the  Lord   and  Lady   of  the
  Galadrim,'  said  Halldir.(4) 'It  is  their  wish  that  you  should  go  up
  and speak to them.'                                                        
    One   of   the  elf-wardens   then  blew   a  clear   note  on   a  small
  horn,  and  a  ladder  was  let  down.  'I  will  go  first,'  said Haldir.
  'Let  the  chief  hobbit  go  next,  and  with  him  Legolas.   The  others
  may  follow  as  they  wish.  It  is  a  long  climb,  but  you   may  rest
  upon the way.'                                                             
    As   he   passed   upwards  Frodo   saw  many   smaller  flets   to  this
  side   or   that,   some   with   rooms   built  on   them;  but   about  a
  hundred  feet  above  the  ground  they  came  to  a  flet  that  was  very
  wide  -  like  the  deck  of  a  great  ship. On  it was  built a  house so
  large  that  almost  it  might  have  been a  hall of  men upon  the earth.
  He  entered  behind  Haldir,  and  saw  that  he  was   in  a   chamber  of
  oval  shape,  through  the  midst  of   which  passed   the  bole   of  the
  great  tree.  It  was  filled  with a  soft golden  light. Many  elves were
  seated  there.  The  roof  was  a  pale  gold,  the  walls  of   green  and
  silver.  On  two  seats  at  the  further  end  sat side  by side  the Lord
  and  Lady  of  Lothlorien.  They  looked  tall  even   as  they   sat,  and
  their   hair   was  white   and long.(5) They  said   no  word   and  moved
  not, but their eyes were shining.                                          
    Haldir  led  Frodo   and  Legolas   before  them,   and  the   Lord  bade
  them   welcome,   but   the    Lady   Galadriel    said   no    word,   and
  looked long into their faces.                                              
    'Sit  now,  Frodo  of  the   Shire,'  said   Keleborn.  'We   will  await
  the   others.'   Each  of   the  companions   he  greeted   courteously  by
  name   as   they   entered.   'Welcome,   Ingold   son   of   Ingrim!'(6) he
  said.   'Your   name   is   known  to   me,  though   never  in   all  your
  wanderings   have   you   sought   my   house.   Welcome,   Gimli   son  of
  Gloin!  It  is  almost  out  of  mind  since  we  saw  one of  Durin's folk
  in  Calas  Galadon.  But  today  our  long  law  is  broken:  let  it  be a
  sign  that  though  the  world  is  dark,  better  things  shall  come, and
  friendship shall grow again between our peoples.'                          

                     
                                                                   
  When  all  the  Company  had  come  in  and  were   seated  before
 him, the Lord looked at them again. 'Is this all?' he  asked. 'Your
 number  should   be  nine.   For  so   the  secret   messages  from
 Rivendell  have  said. There  is one  absent whom  I miss,  and had
 hoped much to see. Tell me, where is Gandalf the grey?'(7)         
  'Alas!'  said  Ingold.  'Gandalf  the  grey  went  down  into  the
 shadows.  He  remains  in  Moria,  for  he  fell  there   from  the
 Bridge.'                                                           
  At  these  words  all  the  Elves  cried  aloud  with   grief  and
 amazement.  'This  is  indeed  evil  tidings,' said  Keleborn, 'the
 most  evil  that  have here  been spoken  for years  uncounted. Why
 has nothing been said to us of this before?'  he asked,  turning to
 Haldir.                                                            
  'We  did  not  speak  of  it  to  [your  people  >]  Haldir,' said
 Frodo.  'We  were  weary  and  danger  was  too  nigh,  and  after-
 wards  we  were  overcome  with  wonder.(8) Almost  we   forgot  our
 grief and  dismay as  we walked  on the  fair paths  of Lothlorien.
 But it is true that  Gandalf has  perished. He  was our  guide, and
 led  us  through  Moria;   and  when   our  escape   seemed  beyond
 hope he saved us, and fell.'                                       
  'Tell me the full tale,' said Keleborn.                           
  Ingold  then  recounted  all that  had happened  upon the  pass of
 Caradras  and  afterwards;  and  he  spoke  of  Balin and  his book
 and the fight  in the  Chamber of  Mazarbul, and  the fire, and the
 narrow bridge, and the coming of the Balrog.                       
  'A  Balrog!'  said  Keleborn.(9) 'Not  since the  Elder Days  have I
 heard  that  a  Balrog  was  loose  upon  the  world. Some  we have
 thought  are  perhaps  hidden  in  Mordor  [?or] near  the Mountain
 of Fire, but naught has been seen  of them  since the  Great Battle
 and the  fall of  Thangorodrim.(10) I  doubt much  if this  Balrog has
 lain hid in the Misty Mountains  - and  I fear  rather that  he was
 sent by Sauron from Orodruin, the Mountain of Fire.'               
  'None know,' said Galadriel,  'what may  lie hid  at the  roots of
 the  ancient  hills.  The  dwarves  had  re-entered Moria  and were
 searching  again in  dark places,  and they  may have  stirred some
 evil.'(11)                                                        
  There  was  a  silence.  At  length Keleborn  spoke again.  'I did
 not know,' he said, 'that your plight was so evil. I will do what I
 can to aid you,  each according  to his  need, but  especially that
 one of the little folk that bears the burden.'                     
  'Your quest  is known  to me,'  said Galadriel,  [?seeing] Frodo's
 look, 'though we will not here speak more  openly of  it. I  was at

                                                       
                                                                      
 the  White  Council,  and  of  all  those  there  gathered none  did I
 love  more  than  Gandalf  the  Grey.  Often  have  we  met  since and
 spoken   of   many  things   and  purposes.   The  lord   and  lady-of
 Lothlorien  are  accounted  wise  beyond  the  measure  of  the  Elves
 of  Middle-earth,  and  of  all  who  have   not  passed   beyond  the
 Seas.  For  we  have  dwelt  here  since  the  Mountains  were  reared
 and the Sun was young.(12)                                                
   'Now   we   will   give   you   counsel.(13) For not  in   doing  or
 contriving nor in choosing this  course or  that is  my skill,  but in
 knowledge  of  what was  and is,  and in  part of  what shall  be. And
 I say that your case is not yet without  hope; yet  but a  little this
 way or that and it will fail miserably. But there is yet hope,  if all
 the  Company  remains  true.'  She  looked  at   each  in   turn,  but
 none  blenched.  Only  Sam  blushed  and  hung  his  head  before  the
 Lady's glance left him. 'I felt  as if  I hadn't  got nothing  on,' he
 explained afterwards. 'I didn't  like it  - she  seemed to  be looking
 inside me,  and asking  me whether  I would  like to  fly back  to the
 Shire.'  Each  of  them  had had  a similar  experience, and  had felt
 as  if  he  had  been  presented  with  a  choice  between  death  and
 something  which  he  desired  greatly,  peace,  ease  [written above:
 freedom), wealth, or lordship.                                        
   'I suppose it was just a test,' said Boromir. 'It felt almost like a
 temptation.  Of  course  I  put  it  away  at once.  The men  of Minas
 Tirith  at  any  rate  are  true.'(14) What  he had  been offered  he did
 not say.                                                              
   'Now is  the time  for any  to depart  or turn  back who  feels that
 he  has  done  enough,  and  aided  the Quest  as much  as he  has the
 will  or  power  to  do.  Legolas  may  abide  here  with my  folk, as
 long  as he  desires, or  he may  return home  if chance  allows. Even
 Gimli  the  dwarf  may  stay  here,  though  I  think  he   would  not
 long  be  content  in  my  city in  what will  seem to  him a  life of
 idleness.  If  he  wishes  to  go  to his  home, we  will help  him as
 much  as  we  can;  as  far  as  the  Gladden  Fields  and  beyond. He
 might  hope  thus  to  find  the  country  of  the   Beornings,  where
 Grimbeorn  Beorn's  son  the  Old  is  a  lord  of  many  sturdy  men.
 As yet no wolf or orc make headway in that land.'                     
   'That  I  know well,'  said Gimli.  'Were it  not for  the Beornings
 the  passage  from  Dale  to  Rivendell  would  not  be  possible.(15) My
 father  and  I  had  the  aid  of  Grimbeorn  on our  way west  in the
 autumn.'                                                              
   'You,  Frodo,'  said  Keleborn,  'I  cannot aid  or counsel.  But if
 you  go  on,  do  not despair  - but  beware even  of your  right hand

 and  of  your  left.  There is  also a  danger that  pursues you,  which I
 do  not  see  clearly  or  understand.  You  others of  the little  folk I
 could  wish  had  never  come  so  far.  For  now  unless  you  will dwell
 here  in  exile  while  outside  in  the world  many years  run by,  I see
 not   what  you   can  do   save  go   forward.  It   would  be   vain  to
 attempt to return home or to Rivendell alone.'                            
                                                                          
   The whole of this passage, from  'Now is  the time  for any  to depart',
 is marked off  with directions  'To come  in later'  and 'At  beginning of
 next  chapter  before  they  go'. At  the top  of the  page, and  no doubt
 written in after this decision was made, is the following:                
                                                                          
   'Now   we   have   spoken   long,   and   yet   you  have   toiled  and
 suffered  much,  and  have  travelled  far,'  said  Keleborn.   'Even  if
 your  quest  did  not  concern  all  free lands  deeply, you  should here
 have  refuge  for  a  while. In  this city  you may  abide until  you are
 healed and rested. We will not yet think of your further road.'           
                                                                          
   The  character  of  the  manuscript  now  changes  again.  Very  roughly
 written in ink, it is evidently the continuation of the original pencilled
 text that  was over-written  or erased  in the  preceding section  (see p.
 245). At the top of the first page of this part are notes on the  names of
 the Lord and Lady of  Lothlorien. In  pencilled text  visible in  the last
 section  their  original  names  Tar  and  Finduilas  had changed  to Aran
 and  Rhien  (note  3),  and  then to  Galdaran and  Galdri(e)n (note  9) -
 Galadriel  on  p.  246  belongs  with the  later, overwritten  text. Their
 names now change further:                                                 
   Galathir = GalaD-hir tree-lord                                          
   Galadhrien = GalaD-rhien tree-lady                                      
 The  name  of the  Lord does  not appear  in the  concluding part  of this
 chapter, but the name of the Lady  is Galadrien  (at the  first occurrence
 only, Galdrien), with pencilled correction in some cases to Galadriel.
   This is a convenient place to set  out my  father's original  scheme for
 the next part of  the story.  This was  written at  furious speed  but has
 fortunately proved almost entirely decipherable.                          
                                                                          
    They dwell 15 days in Caras Galadon.                                   
      Elves  sing  for  Gandalf.  They  watch  weaving  and making  of the
   silver  rope  of  the  fibre  under  mallorn  bark.  The  [?  trimming] of
   arrows.                                                                 
      King  Galdaran's  mirror  shown to  Frodo. Mirror  is of  silver filled
   with fountain water in sun.                                             
      Sees  Shire  far away.  Trees being  felled and  a tall  building being
   made   where  the   old  mill was.(16) Gaffer Gamgee  turned   out.  Open
   trouble,  almost  war,  between  Marish  and  Buckland   on  one   hand  -
   and  the  West.  Cosimo  Sackville-Baggins  very  rich,  buying  up  land.
   (All / Some of this is future.)                                         

   King  Galdaran  says  the  mirror  shows   past,  present,   and  future,
 and skill needed to decide which.                                             
   Sees  a  grey  figure  like  Gandalf  [?going along]  in twilight  but it
 seems to be clad in white. Perhaps it is Saruman.                             
   Sees a mountain spouting flame. Sees Gollum?                                
   They   depart.   At  departure   Elves  give   them  travel   food.  They
 describe  the  Stone  hills,  and  bid  them   beware  of   Fangorn  Forest
 upon the Ogodruth or Entwash. He is an Ent or great giant.                    
                                                                              j
                                                                              
 It  is  seen  that  it  was  while  my father  was writing  the 'Lothlorien'
 story ab initio that  the Lady  of Lothlorien  emerged (p.  233); and  it is  ]
 also  seen  that  the  figure  of  Galadriel (Rhien,  Galadrien) as  a great
 power  in  Middle-earth  was  deepened  and  extended as  he wrote.  In this
 sketch  of  his  ideas,  written  down  after  the  story had  reached Caras
 Galadon,  as  the  name  Galdaran  shows  (note  9),  the Mirror  belongs to
 the Lord (here called King).                                                  
 It is also  interesting to  observe that  the images  of the  violated Shire
 seen in the Mirror  were to  be Frodo's.  The Stone  hills mentioned  at the
 end  of  this  outline  are  mentioned also  in the  plot-notes given  on p.
 233, where the 'parting of the ways' is to take  place 'at  Stonehills'. The
 Entwash  (though  not  the  Elvish   name  Ogodruth)   has  been   named  in
 the  elaborate  outline  that  followed  the  conclusion  of  the  story  of
 Moria  (p.  210):   'Merry  and   Pippin  come   up  Entwash   into  Fangorn
 and  have  adventure  with  Treebeard.'  Here   the  name   Entwash  clearly
 implies that Treebeard is an Ent, and he is specifically so called  (for the
 first time) in the outline just given;  but since  Treebeard was  still only
 waiting in the wings as  a potential  ingredient in  the narrative  this may
 be  only a  slight shift  in the  development of  the word.  The Troll-lands
 north  of  Rivendell   were  the   Entish  Lands   and  Entish   Dales  (Old
 English  ent  'giant'); and  only when  Treebeard and  the other  'Ents' had
 been  fully  realised  would  the  Troll-lands  be  renamed  Ettendales  and
 Ettenmoors (see p. 65 note 32).                                               
 I  return  now  to  the  narrative,  which  as   I  have   said  recommences
 here  in  its  primary  form  (and  thus  we  meet  again  here   the  names
 Gal(a)drien,  Hathaldir,  and  Elfstone,  which   had  been   superseded  in
 the rewritten section of the draft text).                                     
                                                                              
 'Yet let not your hearts be troubled,' said the Lady Galdrien.                
 'Here you shall rest tonight and other nights to follow.'                     
 That night they slept upon the ground, for they were safe                     
 within the walls of Caras Galadon. The Elves spread them a                    
 pavilion among the trees not far from the fountain, and there                 
 they slept until the light of day was broad.                                  
 All the while they remained in Lothlorien the sun shone and                   
 the weather was clear and cool like early spring rather than                  
 mid-winter. They did little but rest and walk among the trees,                

 and eat and drink the good things that the Elves set  before them.
 They  had  little  speech  with  any  for  few  spoke any  but the
 woodland tongue.  Hathaldir had  departed to  the defences  of the
 North.  Legolas  was  away  all  day  among  the  Elves. [Marginal
 addition of the same  time as  the text:  Only Frodo  and Elfstone
 went   much   among  the   Elves.  They   watched  them   at  work
 weaving the ropes of silver fibre  of mallorn  bark, the  [? trim-
 ming] of arrows, their broidery and carpentry.]                  
   They  spoke  much  of  Gandalf,  and  ever  as  they  themselves
 were healed of hurt and weariness the grief  of their  loss seemed
 more  bitter.  Even  the Elves  of Lothlorien  seemed to  feel the
 shadow  of  that  fall.  Often  they  heard  near  them  the elves
 singing,  and  knew  that  they  made  songs  and laments  for the
 grey  wanderer  [written  above:  pilgrim],  as  they  called him,
 Mithrandir.(17) But  if  Legolas  was  by  he  would  not  interpret,
 saying that it passed  his skill.  Very sweet  and sad  the voices
 sounded,  and  having  words  spoke  of  sorrow  to  their  hearts
 though their minds understood them not.(18)                      
   On the evening of the third day  Frodo was  walking in  the cool
 twilight apart  from the  others. Suddenly  he saw  coming towards
 him  the Lady  Galadrien gleaming  in white  among the  stems. She
 spoke  no  word  but  beckoned to  him. Turning  back she  led him
 to the south side of the  city, and  passing through  a gate  in a
 green wall they came  into an  enclosure like  a garden.  No trees
 grew  there and  it was  open to  the sky,  which was  now pricked
 with many stars.(19) Down a  flight of  white steps  they went  into a
 green  hollow  through  which  ran a  silver stream,  flowing down
 from  the  fountain  on  the  hill.  There  stood upon  a pedestal
 carved like a tree a shallow bowl of silver and beside it  a ewer.
 With water from the stream she  filled the  bowl, and  breathed on
 it, and when the water was again still she spoke.                
   'Here is the mirror of Galadrien,' she said. 'Look therein!'
   Sudden  awe  and fear  came over  Frodo. The  air was  still and
 the  hollow  dark,  and  the  Elf-lady beside  him tall  and pale.
 'What shall I look for, and what shall I see?' he asked.         
   'None can say,' she  answered, 'who  does not  know all  that is
 in your  heart, in  your memory,  and your  hope. For  this mirror
 shows both the past and the present, and that which is  called the
 future, in so far as it can be  seen by  any in  Middle-earth.(20) But
 those are wise who can discern [to] which  of [these]  three [the]
 things that they see belong.'                                    
   Frodo  at  last  stooped over  the bowl.  The water  looked hard

 and  black.  Stars  were  shining  in  it. Then  they went  out. The
 dark  veil   was  partly   withdrawn,  and   a  grey   light  shone;
 mountains  were  in  the  distance, a  long road  wound back  out of
 sight.  Far  away a  figure came  slowly: very  small at  first, but
 slowly  it  drew  near.  Suddenly  Frodo  saw that  it was  like the
 figure of Gandalf. So  clear was  the vision  that he  almost called
 aloud  the  wizard's  name.  Then  he  saw that  the figure  was all
 clothed in white,  not in  grey, and  had a  white staff.  It turned
 aside  and  went  away  round  a  turn  of  the  road  with  head so
 bowed that  he could  see no  face. Doubt  came over  him: was  it a
 sight of Gandalf on one of  his many  journeys long  ago, or  was it
 Saruman? (21)                                                      
   Many  other  visions  passed  over  the  water one  after another.
 A  city  with  high  stone  walls  and seven  towers, a  great river
 flowing  through  a  city  of  ruins,  and  then   breathtaking  and
 strange  and  yet  known  at  once: a  stony shore,  and a  dark sea
 into  which  a  bloodred  sun  was  sinking  among  black  clouds, a
 ship darkly outlined was near the sun.  He heard  the faint  sigh of
 waves  upon  the  shore.  Then...  nearly  dark and  he saw  a small
 figure  running  -  he  knew  that  it was  himself, and  behind him
 [?stooped  to  the  ground]  came  another  black  figure  with long
 arms  moving  swiftly  like  a  hunting dog.(22)  He  turned   away  in
 fear and would look no more.                                       
   'Judge  not  these  visions,'  said  Galadrien,  'until  they  are
 shown true or false. But think not that by  singing under  the trees
 [?  and  alone],  nor  even by  slender arrows  from [?  many] bows,
 do we  defend Lothlorien  from our  encircling foes.  I say  to you,
 Frodo,  that  even  as I  speak I  perceive the  Dark Lord  and know
 part of his mind - and ever  he is  groping to  see my  thought: but
 the door is closed.' She spread out her  hands and  held them  as in
 denial  towards  the East.(23) A ray  of the  Evening Star  shone clear
 in the sky, so clear that the pillar beneath the basin cast  a faint
 shadow. Its  ray lit  the ring  upon her  finger and  flashed. Frodo
 gazed at it stricken suddenly  with awe.  'Yes,' she  said, divining
 his thought. 'It is not permitted to speak of it, and  Elrond [?said
 nought]. But verily it is in Lothlorien that  one remains:  the Ring
 of  Earth,  and  I  am  its keeper.(24) He suspects  but he  knows not.
 See  you  not  now  why  your  coming  is  to  us  as the  coming of
 Doom? For if you fail then we  are laid  bare to  the Enemy.  But if
 you  succeed,  then  our  power  is  minished and  slowly Lothlorien
 will fade.'(25)                                                    
   Frodo bent his head. 'And what do you wish?' he said at last.

                      
                                                                       
  'That  what  should (26) be  shall   be,'  she   said.  'And   that  you
 should  do  with  all  your  might that  which is  your task.  For the
 fate  of  Lothlorien  you  are  not  answerable;  but  only   for  the
 doing of your own task.'                                               
                                                                       
  Here the narrative ends (and  on the  last page  of the  manuscript my
 father wrote 'Chapter ends  with Lady's  words to  Frodo' -  meaning of
 course the whole story from Dimrill  Dale), but  the text  continues at
 once with Sam's vision in  the Mirror  (see note  19), which  my father
 did not at this stage integrate with what he had just written. What Sam
 saw in the water appeared already in the preliminary outline  (p. 249),
 though there given to Frodo.                                           
                                                                       
  (Put in Sam's vision of the Shire before the ring scene.)             
  Sam saw trees being felled in the Shire. 'There's that Ted            
 Sandyman,'   he   said,  'a-cutting   down  trees   that.shouldn't  be.
 Bless  me,  if  he's  not felling  them on  the avenue  by the  road to
 Bywater  where  they  serve  only  for  shade.  I wish  I could  get at
 him. I'd  fell him.'  Then Sam  saw a  great red  building with  a tall
 [?   smoke]   chimney   going  up   where  the   old  mill   had  been.
 'There's  some  devilry  at  work  in  the  Shire,'  he  said.  'Elrond
 knew  what  was   what,  when   he  said   Mr  Brandybuck   and  Pippin
 should go back.'(27)                                                   
  Suddenly  Sam  gave  a  cry  and  sprang  away.  'I can't  stay here,'
 he  said  wildly.  'I  must  go  home.   They're  digging   up  Bagshot
 Row  and  there  is  the  poor  old  gaffer  going  down the  hill with
 his bits of stuff in a barrow. I must go home!'                       
  'You  cannot  go  home,'  said  the  Lady.  'Your  path   lies  before
 you.  You  should  not  have  looked  if  you  would let  anything that
 you  see  turn  you  from  your  task.  But  I will  say this  for your
 hope:  remember  that  the  mirror  shows  many  things,  and  not  all
 that  you  see  have  yet  been.  Some  of  the  things  it  shows come
 never to  pass, unless  one forsakes  the path  [? and] turns  aside to
 prevent them.'                                                         
  Sam  sat  on  the  grass  and  muttered.  'I  wish  I  had  never come
 here.'                                                                 
  'Will  you  now  look,  Frodo?  said  the  Lady,  'or  have  you heard
 enough?'                                                               
  'I will look,' said Frodo... Fear was mingled with desire.            
                                                                       
  Here the manuscript ends, with  the following  notes scribbled  at the
 foot  of  the  page:  'Chapter ends  with Lady's  words to  Frodo. Next
 Chapter  begins  with  departure  from  Lothlorien  on New  Year's Day,
 midwinter day, just  before the  sun turned  to the  New Year  and just
 after New Moon.'(28)                                                   

    On a separate  slip, certainly  of this  time, is  written (in  ink over
  pencil) the passage in which Frodo sees  the searching  Eye in  the Mirror
  (see  note  23).  This is  almost word  for word  the same  as in  FR (pp.
  379 - 80), except for these sentences: 'the black slit of its pupil opened
  on  a pit  of malice  and despair.  It was  not still,  but was  roving in
  perpetual search. Frodo knew with certainty and horror...'                
    On the back of this slip is scribbled the original draft of the speeches
  of Galadriel and Frodo beside the Mirror in FR pp. 381 - 2:               
                                                                           
      Frodo  offers  Galadriel  the  Ring.  She  laughs.  Says he  is revenged
    for  her  temptation.  Confesses  that  the thought  had occurred  to her.
    But she will only  retain the  unsullied Ring.  Too much  evil lay  in the
    Ruling  Ring.  It  is  not  permitted  to  use  anything  that  Sauron has
    made.                                                                   
      Frodo  asks  why  he  cannot  see  the  other  rings.  Have  you  tried?
    You  can  see  a  little already.  You have  penetrated my  thought deeper
    than  many  of  my  own  folk.  Also  you penetrated  the disguise  of the
    Ringwraiths.  And  did  you  not  see  the ring  on my  hand? Can  you see
    my  ring?  she  said,  turning  to  Sam. No,  Lady, he  said. I  have been
    wondering much at all your talk.                                        
                                                                           
    In  this  passage  there  emerges  at last  and clearly  the fundamental
  conception  that  the  Three  Rings  of  the  Elves   were  not   made  by
  Sauron: 'She will only retain  the unsullied  Ring. Too  much evil  lay in
  the  Ruling Ring.  It is  not permitted  to use  anything that  Sauron has
  made.'                                                                    
    With  this  compare  the  passage  from  the  original  version  of 'The
  Council  of  Elrond' (VI.404)  cited on  p. 155:  'The Three  Rings remain
  still.  They  have  conferred  great  power  on the  Elves, but  they have
  never yet availed them in  their strife  with Sauron.  For they  came from
  Sauron  himself,  and  can  give  no skill  or knowledge  that he  did not
  already possess at their  making.' In  the fifth  version of  that chapter
  (p.  156)  Elrond's words  become: 'The  Three Rings  remain. But  of them
  I am not permitted to speak.  Certainly they  cannot be  used by  us. From
  them  the  Elvenkings  have  derived much  power, but  they have  not been
  used for war, either good or evil.' I have argued in  the same  place that
  though no longer explicit  the conception  must still  have been  that the
  Three  Rings  came  from  Sauron,  both   because  Boromir   asserts  this
  without  being  contradicted,  and  because  it  seems  to  be  implied by
  'Certainly they cannot be used by us.' If this is so, there is at least an
  apparent  ambiguity:  'they  cannot  be used  by us',  but 'from  them the
  Elvenkings  have  derived  much  power'  -  though  in  'they   cannot  be
  used by us' Elrond is evidently speaking expressly of  their use  for war.
  But  any  ambiguity  there  might  be  is  now  swept away  by Galadriel's
  assertion:  nothing  that  was  Sauron's can  be made  use of:  from which
  it must follow that the Three Rings of the Elves were of other origin.
    A  page  found  wholly  isolated  from  other  manuscripts  of  The Lord

 of the Rings carries more developed drafting  for Galadriel's  refusal of
 the  Ring. This  page had  been used  already for  other writing,  on the
 subject of the origin of the Rings of Power; but I have  no doubt  at all
 that the two elements (the one  in places  written over  and intermingled
 with the other)  belong to  the same  time. This  other text  consists of
 several  distinct  openings  to  a  speech,  each in  turn abandoned  - a
 speech  that  I  think  was  intended  for  Elrond  at  the   Council  in
 Rivendell, since the following very faint pencilling can  be made  out on
 this  page: '  "Nay,> said  Elrond, that  is not  wholly true.  The rings
 were  made  by  the  Elves  of  the  West,  and  taken  from them  by the
 Enemy..." '                                                             
   The first of these openings reads thus, printed exactly as it stands:
                                                                        
   In  Ancient  Days,  the  Rings  of  Power  were  made  long ago  in the
   lands beyond the  Sea. It  is said  that they  were first  contrived by
   Feanor, the greatest of  all the  makers among  the Elves.  His purpose
   was  not  evil, yet  in it  was the  Great Enemy  But they  were stolen
   by  the  Great  Enemy  and  brought  to  Middle-earth.  Three  Rings he
   made, the Rings of Earth, Sea and Sky.                                
                                                                        
 This was at once replaced by:                                           
                                                                        
   In Ancient Days, before  he turned  wholly to  evil, Sauron  the Great,
   who  is  now  the  Dark  Lord  that  some  call  the  Necromancer, made
   and contrived many things of wonder. He made Rings of Power           
                                                                        
 Then  follows,  written  out  anew,  the  opening  sentence of  the first
 version; and then:                                                      
                                                                        
   In  Ancient Days  the Great  Enemy came  to the  lands beyond  the Sea;
   but his evil purpose was for  a time  hidden, even  from the  rulers of
   the  world,  and  the  Elves  learned  many  things  of  him,  for  his
   knowledge was very great and his thoughts strange and wonderful.      
    In those  days the  Rings of  Power were  made. It  is said  that they
   were fashioned first by  Feanor the  greatest of  all the  makers among
   the Elves of the West, whose skill surpassed that of all folk  that are
   or  have  been.  The skill  was his  but the  thought was  the Enemy's.
   Three Rings he  made, the  Rings of  Earth, Sea  and Sky.  But secretly
   the  Enemy  made  One  Ring,  the  Ruling  Ring,  which  controlled all
   the  others.  And  when  the  Enemy  fled  across the  Sea and  came to
   Middle-earth,  he  stole  the   Rings  and   brought  them   away.  And
   others he made like to them, and yet false.                           
    And  many  others  he  made  of  lesser  powers,  and  the  elves wore
   them and became powerful and proud                                    
                                                                        
 Breaking  off  here,  my  father began  once more:  'In Ancient  Days the
 Great Enemy and Sauron his  servant came';  and at  this point,  I think,
 he definitively abandoned the conception.                               
   These   extraordinary  vestiges   show  him   revolving  the   mode  by

 which  he  should  withdraw  the Three  Rings of  the Elves  from inherent
 evil  and  derivation  from  the  Enemy.  For  a  fleeting   moment  their
 making was set in the  remote ages  of Valinor  and attributed  to Feanor,
 though  inspired  by  Morgoth:  cf. the  Quenta Silmarillion,  V.228, $49,
 'Most fair of all was  Morgoth to  the Elves,  and he  aided them  in many
 works,  if they  would let  him.... the  Gnomes took  delight in  the many
 things  of  hidden  knowledge  that   he  could   reveal  to   them.'  And
 Morgoth stole the Rings of Feanor, as he stole the Silmarils.             
                                                                          
   The  fair  copy  manuscript  of  'Chapter  XVIII,  Lothlorien'  (p. 235)
 continued  on  without  break,  following  the  primary  draft,  into  the
 account  of the  arrival of  the Company  in Caras  Galadon and  the story
 of Galadriel's Mirror.  My father's  decision to  divide the  long chapter
 into  two  seems  however   to  have   been  made   at  the   point  where
 Galadriel  silently  searched  the  minds  of each  member of  the Company
 in  turn;(29) and  it  had  certainly  been taken  by an  early stage  in the
 writing  of  'Farewell  to  Lorien' (p.  272). The  new chapter  (XIX) was
 given the title 'Galadriel', which I  have adopted  here; and  it advances
 in a single stride almost to the text of FR for most of its length, though
 there  remain  some  notable  passages  in  which the  final form  in 'The
 Mirror of Galadriel' was not achieved.                                    
   When  the  Company  came  to  the  city  of  the Galadrim,  Haldir said:
 'Welcome to Caras Galadon, the city  of Angle'  (cf. p.  245 and  note 1),
 which  was  changed  in  the  act   of  writing   to  'Welcome   to  Caras
 Galadon,  the  city  of  Lothlorien';  continuing  'where  dwell  the Lord
 Arafain and Galadriel the Lady of the  Elves'. Since  the present  text is
 self-evidently the successor of the text (written over the original draft,
 see  p. 245  and note  3) in  which Keleborn  and Galadriel  first appear,
 Arafain  must  have  been  a  fleeting  substitution  for  Keleborn, which
 was  immediately  restored,  and  is  the name  as written  throughout the
 remainder  of  the  manuscript.  The  journey  round  the  circuit  of the
 walls  of  Caras  Galadon seems  to have  been differently  conceived from
 its representation in the earliest version, to judge by the  little sketch
 inserted into  the manuscript  (see note  2), from  which it  appears that
 the  Company,  coming  from  the  north,  would  pass  down   the  western
 side - as they  did in  FR (p.  368). Here,  on the  other hand,  the city
 climbed 'like a green cloud upon their right', and the  gates of  the city
 'faced eastward'.                                                         
   Both  Galadriel  and  Keleborn  still  have  long  white hair  (pp. 233,
 246),  though  this  was early  changed to  make Galadriel's  hair golden.
 As in the rewritten portion of the  first draft,  'Aragorn' is  greeted by
 Keleborn as 'Ingold, son of Ingrim'  (p. 246  and note  6), and  Ingold is
 his  name  in  the  text  as  written  at  subsequent  occurrences  in the
 chapter.(30) Keleborn speaks  the same  words to  him as  in the  first draft:
 'Your  name  was  known  to  me  before,  though  never  yet  in  all your
 wanderings  have  you  sought  my house';  and no  greeting to  Legolas is

 yet reported, as it is in FR, where he is named 'son of Thranduil'.          
   In  Keleborn's  opening  words  to   the  Company   he  says   here:  'Your
 number  should  be  nine:  so  said  the  messages.  Can  we   have  mistaken
 them?  They  were  faint  and  hard  to  read,  for Elrond  is far  away, and
 darkness  gathers  between  us:  even  in  this  year  it has  grown deeper.'
 Galadriel  then  intervenes:  'Nay, there  was no  mistake...' (see  note 7).
 But  most  notably,  it  is  here that  the history  and significance  of the
 Balrog  of  Moria first  appears (see  pp. 185-6,  and p.  247 and  note 11).
 The passage in the present version is as follows:                            
                                                                             
   Ingold   then  recounted   all  that   had  happened   upon  the   pass  of
 Caradras,  and  in  the   days  that   followed;  and   he  spoke   of  Balin
 and   his   book,   and   the  fight   in  the   Chamber  of   Mazarbul,  and
 the  fire,  and  the   narrow  bridge,   and  the   coming  of   the  Balrog.
 'At  least,  that  name  did  Legolas  give to  it,' said  Ingold. 'I  do not
 know  what  it  was,  save  that  it  was  both  dark  and  fiery,   and  was
 terrible and strong.'                                                        
   'It   was   a   Balrog,'  said   Legolas:  'of   all  elf-banes   the  most
 deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.'                            
   'A    Balrog!'   said    Keleborn.   'Your    news   becomes    ever   more
 grievous.  Not  since  the  Days  of  Flight  have  I   heard  that   one  of
 those  fell  things   was  loose.   That  one   slept  beneath   Caradras  we
 feared.  The  Dwarves  have   never  told   me  the   tale  of   those  days,
 yet  we  believe  that  it  was  a   Balrog  that   they  aroused   long  ago
 when they probed too deep beneath the mountains.'                            
   'Indeed   I   saw   upon  the   bridge  that   which  haunts   our  darkest
 dreams,   I   saw   Durin's   Bane,'  said   Gimli  in   a  low   voice,  and
 terror was in his eyes.                                                      
   'Alas!   '   said   Keleborn.   'Had   I   known   that  the   Dwarves  had
 stirred  up  this  evil  in  Moria   again,  I   would  have   forbidden  you
 to   pass   the   northern   borders,   you   and   all   that    went   with
 you....'                                                                    
                                                                             
 The  remainder  of  this  passage  is  virtually  as  in   FR  (p.   371).  -
 Galadriel's  words  following  'But  we  will  not  here  speak  more  openly
 of it' were at first retained exactly from the first draft (pp. 247 - 8), but
 were changed immediately to read thus:                                       
                                                                             
 '...  The  Lord  and  Lady  of the  Galadrim are  accounted wise             
 beyond the measure even of the Elves of Middle-earth, and of all             
 who have  not passed  beyond the  Seas. For  we have  dwelt here             
 since the mountains were reared and  the sun  was young.  Was it             
 not I that summoned  the White  Council? And  if my  designs had             
 not  gone  amiss,  it would  have been  governed by  Gandalf the             

                                       
                                                                           
 Grey; and then mayhap things would have gone otherwise. But                
 even now there is hope left....'(31)                                       
                                                                           
  The  account  of  the  thoughts  and  sensations  of  the  members  of the
 Company  as  Galadriel looked  at each  in turn  at first  followed closely
 the text of the original  draft (p.  248), but  this was  changed, probably
 at  once, to  the form  in FR  (pp. 372  - 3),  with however  these differ-
 ences:  whereas  in  the first  version 'none  blenched' beneath  her gaze,
 and  in  FR  'none  save  Legolas  and  Aragorn   could  long   endure  her
 glance',  here  'none  of  them  could  long  endure  her  glance' (changed
 subsequently  to  'none  of  the  hobbits');  and  their feelings  are thus
 described:  'It  seemed that  each of  them had  had a  similar experience,
 and had felt that he was offered  a choice  between a  shadow full  of fear
 and  something  he  greatly  desired, that  lay clear  before his  mind lit
 with  an alluring  light.' Boromir's  remarks on  the subject  and Ingold's
 reply here run:                                                            
                                                                           
  'To   me   it   seemed   exceedingly  strange,'   said  Boromir,   'and  I
 do  not  feel  too sure  of this  elvish lady.  Maybe it  was only  a test,
 and   she   sought   to   read   our  thoughts   for  her   amusement;  but
 almost  I  should  have  said  that  she  was  tempting  us,  and  offering
 us  what  she  had  the  power  to  give.  It  need  not  be  said  that  I
 refused  to  listen,  since  the  gift was  not offered  to all  alike. The
 Men  of  Minas-Tirith  at  least  are  true  to  their  friends.'  But what
 he thought the Lady had offered him Boromir did not tell.                  
  'Well,  whatever  you  may  think   of  the   Lady,'  said   Ingold,  'she
 was  a  friend  of  Gandalf,  it  seems.  Though  this   was  one   of  his
 secrets  that  he  did  not  tell me.  Tonight I  shall sleep  without fear
 for the first time since we left Rivendell...'                             
                                                                           
  Nothing is said yet of Frodo's experience.(32)                            
         A curious detail arises here, in that in the conversation of the
 Company  in  their  pavilion  near  the  fountain,  before  they  began  to
 discuss the encounter with Galadriel,  'they talked  of their  night before
 in the tree-tops'. At this stage in the evolution of the narrative they met
 the  northbound   Elves  at   Cerin  Amroth,   and  had   their  blindfolds
 removed, on the same  day as  they left  Nimrodel (see  pp. 233,  235); the
 whole  journey  to Caras  Galadon thus  took a  single day,  and so  it was
 indeed 'the night  before' that  they passed  in the  tree-tops. In  FR (p.
 364)  the  journey  was  extended,  and  they passed  the first  night after
 leaving  Nimrodel  in  the  woods:  'Then  they  rested  and  slept without
 fear  upon  the  ground;  for  their  guides  would  not  permit   them  to
 unbind their eyes, and they could  not climb.'  In the  light of  this, the
 passage in FR (pp. 372 - 3) required revision that it did not  receive: the
 words  'the  travellers  talked  of  their night  before in  the tree-tops'
 survive from the present version, as  does Aragorn's  'But tonight  I shall
 sleep without fear for the first time since I left Rivendell.'             

                                                          
                                                                          
   The remainder  of the  chapter in  this manuscript  is very  close indeed
 to  FR.  The  Company  'remained  many  days  in  Lothlorien,  so   far  as
 they  could  tell  or  remember',  where  FR  has  'some  days';   but  the
 meeting  with  Galadriel  was  now  on  the last  evening spent  there, not
 on the  evening of  the third  day (p. 251).(33) At  first my  father followed
 the original draft of Galadriel's  reply to  Frodo's questions  'What shall
 we look for, and  what shall  we see?'  (ibid.), then  changed it  to read:
 'None  can  tell,  who  do not  know fully  the mind  of the  beholder. The
 Mirror will show things that  were, and  things that  are, and  things that
 yet may be. But which it is  that he  sees, even  the wisest  cannot always
 tell. Do  you wish  to look?'  This was  further developed  to the  text of
 FR in an inserted rider that I think belongs to the time of the  writing of
 the manuscript.                                                           
   On the back of this inserted page is the following, struck out:         
                                                                          
   In  Ancient  Days  Sauron  the Great  contrived many  things of         
 wonder. For a time  his purpose  was not  turned wholly  to evil,         
 or  was  concealed;  and  he  went  much   among  the   Elves  of         
 Middle-earth  and knew  their secret  counsels; and  they learned         
 many things of him, for his  knowledge was  very great.  In those         
 days the Rings  of Power  were made  by elven-smiths,  but Sauron         
 was present at their making: his was the  thought and  theirs the         
 skill; for these Rings (he said) would give the Elves  of Middle-         
 earth  power  and  wisdom  like that  of the  Elves of  the West.         
 [Struck out as soon as written:  They made  many rings,  but One         
 and  Three  and  Seven and  Nine were  rings of  special potency.         
 The  One  only did  Sauron take  as his  reward]; but  he cheated         
 them. [Struck out as soon as written: For  knowing the  secret of         
 the rings he] The Elves made  many rings  at his  bidding: Three,         
 Seven and Nine of special potency, and  others of  lesser virtue.         
 But  knowing  the secret  of their  making, secretly  Sauron made         
 One Ring, the Ruling Ring that governed all  the rest,  and their         
 power was bound up with it, to last only so long as it too should         
 last. And as soon as he had made it and set it upon his hand, the         
 Elves found  that he  was master  of all  that they  had wrought;         
 and they were filled with fear and anger.  Then Sauron  sought to         
 seize all the Rings, for he saw that the Elves would  not lightly         
 submit to him. But  the Elves  fled and  hid themselves,  and the         
 Three  Rings  they  saved;  and  these  Sauron  could   not  find         
 because  the  Elves  concealed  them, and  never again  used them         
 while  Sauron's  mastery  endured.  War  and  enmity   has  never         
 ceased between Sauron and the Elves since those days.                     
                                                                          
   It  seems  to  have  been on  this page  (in view  of the  rejected words
 'The  One  only  did   Sauron  take   as  his   reward')  that   the  final

  conception of the  relation of  the Rings  of Power  to Sauron  emerged, at
  least  in  this  essential:  the  Rings of  Power were  made by  the Elven-
  smiths under  the guidance  of Sauron,  but he  made the  One in  secret to
  govern  all  the  rest. (This  idea had  indeed been  approached in  one of
  the passages given on  p. 255,  but there  it had  been Feanor  himself who
  made  the  Rings  of  Power,  and  Morgoth  who  made  the  Ruling  Ring in
  secret.) It is not said in the passage just cited that  Sauron had  no part
  in  the  making  of  the  Three,   which  were   unsullied  by   his  hand,
  although this is very clearly implied in the original draft  of Galadriel's
  refusal of Frodo's offer of the One (p. 254).                              
    As with  the earlier  passages on  this subject,  I do  not think  it was
  written  for  inclusion  in  'Galadriel',  but  its  association  with this
  chapter is again not accidental: for here the questions of the  relation of
  the  Three  to  the  One,  and  the  nature of  the Three,  were at  last -
  through the showing  forth of  the Ring  of Earth  on Galadriel's  finger -
  brought   to   the  point   where  they   must  necessarily   be  answered.
  Ultimately,  this  passage foreshadows  that in  Of the  Rings of  Power in
  The  Silmarillion  (pp.  287  -  8);  my  father  at  this  stage  probably
  intended it for 'The Council of Elrond' (cf. p. 255).                      
                                                                            
    Sam's visions in the Mirror,  Galadriel's response  to his  outburst, and
  Frodo's  visions  of  the  wizard  and  of  Bilbo  proceed almost  word for
  word  as  in  FR;  but  the further  scenes that  appeared to  Frodo follow
  the  draft  given  in note  21, without  the mysterious  'vast figure  of a
  man'  leaning  on  a  tree.  Gollum  is no  longer seen  (p. 252);  and the
  vision of the Eye reaches the form in FR,  as does  all that  follows, with
  these differences. The white stone  in Galadriel's  ring is  not mentioned;
  and as in the original  text she  still calls  it 'the  Ring of  Earth.' In
  response  to  Frodo's  offer  to  her  of  the  One Ring  Galadriel laughed
  'with  a  sudden  clear  laugh of  pure merriment':  'pure' was  struck out
  early, and  afterwards 'of  merriment'. And  as my  father first  wrote her
  words she said: 'And now at last it comes, the final probe.'(34)           
                                                                            
    A  further  text  of  this  chapter  may  be mentioned  here. This  is an
  unfinished  typescript  of the  fair copy  manuscript just  described. Some
  early  emendations  made  to  the manuscript  were taken  up, but  there is
  no variation whatsoever in the phrasing (always  a clear  sign that  a text
  was  not made  by my  father). I  have noticed  (p. 256  and note  30) that
  in  the  manuscript  Aragorn  was  'Ingold'  throughout,  changed   at  one
  occurrence to  'Aragorn' and  at another  to 'Elfstone',  but at  the other
  three  left  unchanged.  The  typescript  has  'Ingold' at  all occurrences
  except  at  that  where  in  the  manuscript  the   name  was   changed  to
  'Elfstone'.  From  this  I  judge  that it  belongs to  the period  we have
  reached, i.e. before 'Aragorn' was  restored (see  pp. 277  - 8).  But this
  typescript stops at the  bottom of  its sixth  page, at  the words  The air
  was cool and soft, as if it were (FR p. 374); and the text is continued to
  the  end  of  the chapter  in a  very carefully  written manuscript  that I

 made when  I was  seventeen, beginning  at the  head of  'page 7*  with the
 words that follow:  early spring,  yet they  felt about  them the  deep and
 thoughtful  quiet  of  winter  (it  is  thus  obvious  that  my manuscript
 simply  took  up from  the point  where the  typescript stopped).  The text
 in  my  copy  shows  no   further  development   from  my   father's  manu-
 script: thus  Galadriel's ring  remains the  Ring of  Earth, and  she still
 laughs  'with  a  sudden  clear laugh  of merriment'.  At the  end of  it I
 wrote the date: 4 August 1942.                                             
   Whatever the  date of  the typewritten  part of  this composite  text, my
 continuation  of  it  in  manuscript  was  certainly  made  well  after  my
 father  had  completed  work   on  the   'Lothlorien'  story.   He  himself
 declared,  many  years  later,  that  he reached  Lothlorien and  the Great
 River late in 1941, and it will be  seen subsequently  that he  was writing
 'The  Breaking  of  the  Fellowship'  and  'The  Departure  of  Boromir' in
 the middle of the winter of that year (p. 379).                            
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                  
                                                                           
  1.   My  father  first  wrote here  'Welcome to  Nelennas', immediately
       striking  out   Nelennas  and   substituting  Caras   Galadon  (which
       here  first  appears),  and  continuing 'the  city of  Nelennas which
       [?mayhap]  in  your  tongue  is  called  Angle'.  This seems  to show
       that  Nelennas  was  very briefly  the name  of the  city, as  I have
       suggested (p. 242 note 39)  is the  case in  the plot-notes  given on
       p.  233:  'They  journey  to  Nelennas'.  But the  alteration changes
       the  meaning of  Nelennas back  to the  'Gore' or  'Angle', replacing
       Nelen (see p. 231 and note 34).                                      
  2.   A little rough diagram set in the body of the text shows a circular
       figure  shaped  like  one  ring of  a coil,  with a  very substantial
       overlap  between  the  ends of  the line:  the external  opening (the
       entrance into Caras Galadon through the  walls) is  on the  left side
       of  the  figure,  and  the  internal  opening  (the opening  from the
       'lane' into the city) is at the bottom (i.e. the walls overlap  for a
       full quarter of the circuit or more).                                
        There  is  no  mention  of  how  they   passed  through   the  gates
       (contrast  FR  p.  368).  My  father actually  wrote here:  'They saw
       ... the elves on guard at the gate they saw no folk on  guard', etc.,
       striking no words out.                                               
  3.   This is the  first appearance  of Celeborn  and Galadriel.  Just visible
       in  the  underlying  pencilled   text  are   other  names:   Tar  and
       Finduilas  struck  out,  and then  Aran and  Rhien. Rhien  is perhaps
       to  be  equated  with  Rian  (the  name  of  Tuor's mother);  cf. the
       Etymologies,   V.383,   stem  RIG:   'Rhian  name   of  a   woman,  =
       "crown-gift", rig-anna'. See notes 5 and 9.                         

  4. The first occurrence  of Halldir  (sic) for  Hathaldir; a  few lines
     further  on  the name  is spelt  Haldir and  so remains.  Haldir was
     the  original  name  for  this  Elf;  see  p.  240  note 28.  In the
     underlying text the superseded name Hathaldir can be seen.         
  5. This passage (from 'The roof was  a pale  gold') was  retained (i.e.
     not overwritten in ink or erased) from the original  pencilled text,
     and here reappear (after the words  'side by  side') the  names Aran
     and  Rhien  (see  note  3),  subsequently struck  out. On  the white
     hair of Galadriel cf. the plot-notes given on p. 233.              
  6. Ingold  son  of  Ingrim for  Aragorn replaced  Elfstone (see  p. 239
     note 23), since  that name  can be  made out  in the  pencilled text
     beneath. At his last appearance in this manuscript  (p. 232)  he was
     still Aragorn; and it is thus  here that  Elfstone first  appears ab
     initio (as also does Ingold in the secondary text).                
  7. Written in here is the following,  apparently of  the same  time but
     disconnected from the narrative:                                   
         'Nay, there was no  mistake,' said  Galadriel, speaking  for the
     first  time.  Her voice  was deeper  but clear  and musical  / clear
     and  musical  but  deep,  and  seemed  to  carry knowledge  that was
     too deep for mirth.                                                
     This  depends  on  something  said  by  Keleborn,  of  which however
     there is no trace in this manuscript; see p. 257.                  
  8. See p. 227 and note 29.                                            
  9. In  the  underlying  pencilled  text  Aran was  changed here,  as my
     father wrote, to Galdaran; and at the head of  the page  are written
     the  names  Galdaran  and  Galdrin  (perhaps  miswritten   for  Gal-
     drien, see pp. 249 - 50).                                          
 10. On the survival of Balrogs from the Elder Days see V.336, $16.     
 11. Parts of the underlying pencilled text of this  passage can  be made
     out,  and  the  purport  of  Keleborn's  words  was  very  much  the
     same  -  except  that  it  was  Keleborn  (Galdaran)   himself,  not
     Galadriel, who raised a doubt:                                     
       'A Balrog,'  said [Aran  >] Galdaran.  'Of them  I have  not heard
     since  the  Elder  Days  ...  had  hidden  in  Mordor  but  of  them
     naught  has  been  seen  since  the  fall  of Thangorodrim.  I doubt
     much  if  this  Balrog has  ... and  I fear  rather ...  Orodruin in
     Mordor  by  Sauron.  Yet  who  knows  what  lies  hid  at  the roots
     of the ancient hills...'                                           
     At the bottom of the page is a  variant, added  to the  revised text
     but  belonging  to  the  same  time,  in which  it is  Galadriel who
     expresses  the  opinion  previously  given  to  Keleborn,  and  more
     decisively:                                                        
         'No Balrog has lain hid in  the Misty  Mountains since  the fall
     of Thangorodrim,' said  Galadriel. 'If  truly one  was there,  as is
     told,  then  it is  come from  Orodruin, the  Mountain of  Fire, and
     was sent by the Lord whom we do not name in this land.'            

          In  FR,  of  course,  the  view  expressed  here  by   Keleborn  or
       Galadriel  that  the  Balrog,  sent  from  Mordor,  had  entered Moria
       not  long  since  ('it is  come from  Orodruin') has  no place.  In LR
       the  Balrog  of  Moria  came  from  Thangorodrim  at  the  end  of the
       First  Age,  and  'had  lain hidden  at the  foundations of  the earth
       since the coming of the Host of the West' (see pp. 142 - 3).          
          I have suggested (p.  186) that  although a  Balrog appears  in the
       original sketch of  the Moria  story, the  connection with  the flight
       of  the  Dwarves  from  Moria  had  not  yet  been  made.  The present
       passage is the chief evidence for this. It is true that in the version
       in the  main text  Galadriel is  less positive  than Keleborn,  but in
       the subsequent variant  she utters  an emphatic  denial that  a Balrog
       could  have  'lain  hid  in  the  Misty  Mountains  since the  fall of
       Thangorodrim'  (not  that  anybody  present  had  suggested   that  it
       did).  This  must  have  been  my  father's  view,  since it  would be
       strange  indeed  to  introduce  the  Lord  and  Lady   of  Lothlorien,
       'accounted  wise  beyond  the   measure  of   the  Elves   of  Middle-
       earth', in the immediate expression of an erroneous opinion.          
  12.  The  phrases  'The  lord  and  lady of  Lothlorien are  accounted wise
       beyond  the  measure  of  the  Elves  of  Middle-earth'  and  'For  we
       have  dwelt  here since  the Mountains  were reared  and the  Sun was
       young'  strongly suggest  that my  father conceived  them to  be Elves
       of  Valinor,  exiled  Noldor  who  did not  return at  the end  of the
       First  Age.  The  Noldor  came to  Middle-earth in  exile at  the time
       of  the  making  of  the  Sun  and  the  Hiding  of Valinor,  when the
       Mountains  of  the  West were  'raised to  sheer and  dreadful height'
       (V.242).  Afterwards,  when  my  father  returned  to   The  Silmaril-
       lion again,  Galadriel entered  the legends  of the  First Age  as the
       daughter of Finarfin and sister of Finrod Felagund.                   
  13.  The first word  in this  sentence could  be 'Nor'  or 'Now',  but must
       in fact be 'Now' since it is followed by 'we will', not 'will we'. But
       in  FR  Galadriel  says  'I  will  not  give  you  counsel',  and  her
       explanation  of why  she will  not is  almost word  for word  the same
       as what she  says here.  I think  therefore that  my father  must have
       changed  his  mind  concerning  Galadriel's  speech  as he  wrote, but
       failed to alter her opening words.                                    
  14.  A  scribble  at  the  foot  of  the  page  advances   Boromir's  words
       towards  the  form  in  FR  (p.  373):  'she  was  tempting   me,  and
       offered  something that  she had  the power  to give.  It need  not be
       said that I refused to listen.' Cf. p. 258.                           
  15.  A  first  suggestion  of  Keleborn's  offer   to  Legolas   and  Gimli
       appears  in  the  plot-notes  on  p.  233. The  last two  sentences of
       Keleborn's  speech  and  the   first  part   of  Gimli's   reply  were
       subsequently  used  in  Gloin's  conversation  with  Frodo  at  Riven-
       dell  (FR  p.  241):  'Frodo learned  that Grimbeorn  the Old,  son of
       Beorn,  was  now  the  lord  of  many  sturdy men,  and to  their land

      between   the   Mountains    and   Mirkwood    neither   orc    nor   wolf
      dared  to   go.  "Indeed,"   said  Gloin,   "if  it   were  not   for  the
      Beornings   the   passage   from   Dale  to   Rivendell  would   long  ago
      have become impossible." '                                               
  16. The biscuit factory of Sandyman &c Son (p. 216).                         
  17. This is the first appearance of the name Mithrandir (see V.345).         
  18. Scribbled  notes  at  this  point  direct  that  Merry  and  Pippin should
      speak  of  Gandalf,  and  that  they  should  speak  of   the  'temptation
      of  Galadriel';  there  is  also  a reference  to the  'Song of  Frodo and
      Sam'  (FR   pp.  374-5).   A  page   of  rough   workings  for   the  song
      is   found   with   these   papers,    though   without    any   narrative
      framework.  The  first  and  third  verses  were  almost  in  final  form;
      the second at this time read:                                            
                     When morning on the  Hill  was bright
                     across the stream he  rode again;
                     beside our hearth  he sat that night
                     and merry was the firelight then.                                        
      The  second  verse  in  FR,   From  Wilderland   to  Western   shore,  was
      added  in,  apparently  to  stand  between  verses  2  and  3.  The fourth
                                                                              
       verse ran:                                                              
                       A shining sword in deadly hand,                        
                       a hooded pilgrim on the road,                           
                       a mountain-fire above the land,                         
                       a back that bent beneath the load.                      
          The fifth verse had virtually reached the form in FR; the sixth      
       read:                                                                   
                       Of Moria, of Khazaddum                                  
                       all folk shall ever sadly tell                          
                       and now shall name it Gandalf's tomb                    
                       where hope into the Shadow fell.                       
                                                                              
  19.  The  meeting  with  Galadriel  was  altered  at  the  time of  writing to
       the  form  given.  At  first  my  father  did  not  say  that it  was the
       evening  of  the  third  day,  and  when  they  came  to 'a  green hollow
       over  which  there  was  no  roof  or trees'  the sun,  which was  in the
       south,  looked  down  into  it;  cf.  the  outline   given  on   p.  249;
       'Mirror is of silver filled with fountain water in sun'.                
         A  note  in  the  margin  directs  that  Sam  should  also  be present,
       and  another  reads:   'Answer  to   remarks  of   Sam  and   Frodo  that
       these  elves  seem  simple  woodland  folk,  skilled,  but  not specially
       magical' (cf. FR pp. 376 - 7).                                          
  20.  At  this  point  the   following  was   entered  disconnectedly   in  the
       manuscript:  'Frodo   (Sam?)  had   been  heard   to  say   to  Elfstone:
       Elves  seem  quiet,  and  ordinary.  Have  they  magic  as  is reported?'
       Cf. note 19.                                                            
  21.  Against  this  passage  my  father  wrote  in  the  margin: Bilbo.  In an
       isolated  draft  developing  this  passage  the  vision  of Bilbo  in his
       room  at  Rivendell  (FR  p.  379)  is  found  almost  as  in  the  final

                         
                                                                           
      form. In this draft the vision of  'a fortress  with high  stone walls
      and  seven  towers'  is  followed  by  'a  vast  figure  of a  man who
      seemed  to  be standing  leaning on  a tree  that was  only up  to his
      breast'; this was placed  in brackets.  This is  followed by  'a great
      river flowing through a populous  city' (as  in FR),  and then  by the
      vision of the Sea and the dark ship, as in the primary text.          
  22. Cf. the outline of the visions in the  Mirror given  on p.  250: 'Sees
      Gollum?'                                                              
  23. It is notable that in this earliest form of the story the visions that
      Frodo  sees  in  the  Mirror   have  no   reference  to   Sauron,  yet
      Galadriel  at  once speaks  of him,  and the  contest of  their minds,
      introducing thus her revelation  that she  is the  keeper of  the Ring
      of Earth. In  FR (p.  380) it  is because  Galadriel knows  that Frodo
      has seen the Eye that  she at  once speaks  to him  of the  Dark Lord,
      and the showing of her  Ring is  directly related  to his  vision: 'it
      cannot  be  hidden  from  the Ring-bearer,  and one  who has  seen the
      Eye.'                                                                 
  24. For 'the Ring of Earth' see VI.260, 269, 319.                         
  25. Cf.  the  isolated  note  concerning the  fading of  the power  of the
      Elf-rings if the One Ring were destroyed, p. 237.                     
  26. The  word  could  be  equally  well  read  as  'shall'   or  'should';
      'should' in the next manuscript of the chapter (and in FR).           
  27. Cf.  pp.  115, 162.  In FR  Sam says  here that  'Elrond knew  what he
      was  about  when  he  wanted  to  send  Mr.  Merry back';  earlier (FR
      p.  289)  Elrond  had  said  that he  had thought  to send  both Merry
      and Pippin back to the Shire,  but after  Gandalf's support  for their
      inclusion  in  the  Company  he  expressed  doubt   specifically  con-
      cerning Pippin.                                                       
  28. In  the  outline  given  on  p.  249  'They  dwell  15  days  in Caras
      Galadon'.  Starting  from  15  December  as  the  date  of  arrival in
      Lothlorien, even though  that seems  to be  two days  out (see  p. 215
      note 1), and seeing that in the original  story it  was only  a single
      day's  journey from  the night  spent on  the flet  near the  falls of
      Nimrodel to the arrival  in Caras  Galadon at  nightfall, the  date of
      departure can be reckoned to be 1 January.                            
  29. Up  to  this  point  the  pagination  is  doubled,  e.g.  'XVIII.34 /
      XIX.8'; from this point only that of 'XIX' is given.                  
  30. At  three  occurrences  Ingold  was  never  changed;  at  one  it  was
      changed  afterwards  to  Elfstone,  and  at  one  to Aragorn.  See pp.
      277-8.                                                                
  31. An  addition  to the  manuscript after  the words  'For we  have dwelt
      here  since  the  mountains  were  reared  and  the  sun   was  young'
      reads:  'And  I  have  dwelt  here with  him since  the days  of dawn,
      when  I  passed  over  the  seas  with  Melian  of  Valinor;  and ever
      together  we  have  fought  the long  defeat.' This  was not  taken up
      into the following  typescript text  (p. 260),  though it  was entered

 onto  it  in  manuscript,  and  no doubt  belongs to  a later  time. For
 the  coming  of  Melian  to  Middle-earth in  a very  remote age  of the
 world see IV.264, V.111.                                                
32.  There  are  pencilled additions  to the  manuscript after  the words
 'But  what  he  thought  the  Lady  had  offered  him  Boromir  did  not
 tell':  'Here  insert  what  Frodo  thought?'  and  'Neither  did Frodo.
 Whether  it had  been a  temptation, or  a revealing  to himself  of the
 way   of   escape   from  his   task  that   he  had   already  secretly
 considered,  he  could  not  tell.  But  now that  the thought  had been
 made  plain  he  could  not forget  it.' Against  this my  father wrote:
 '(rather  so:)  And   as  for   Frodo,  he   would  not   speak,  though
 Boromir  pressed  him  with  questions.  "She  held  you  long   in  her
 gaze,  Ringbearer,"  he  said.  "Yes," said  Frodo, "but  I will  say no
 more  than  this:  to  me  no  choice  was given."  He drooped  and laid
 his head upon his knees.'                                               
   Frodo's  reply  to  Boromir  was  then  struck  out,  with  the  note:
 'No!  for  this does  not fit  with the  scene at  the Mirror',  and the
 following  substituted:  '  "Yes,"  said   Frodo,  "but   whatever  came
 into my mind then, I will keep there" ' (as in FR, p. 373).             
   None  of  this  appears  in  the  following  typescript  text  (though
 the  two latter  versions were  written onto  it in  turn), and  as with
 the  passage  cited  in  note  31  must be  accounted a  later revision.
 But  what  is  hinted  at  in  the  words  'the way  of escape  from his
 task  that  he  had  already  secretly considered'?  My father  meant, I
 think,  that  Frodo,  under  Galadriel's  gaze,  pondered   the  thought
 of surrendering the  Ruling Ring  to her  (cf. the  passage cited  on p.
 254).                                                                   
33.  Of  Frodo's  song  of Gandalf  it is  said: 'yet  when he  wished to
 repeat it to  Sam only  snatches remained  that said  little of  what he
 had  meant.' At  this point  there is  a large  space on  the manuscript
 page  and  a  pencilled  note:  'Insert  Frodo's  Song?' The  verses are
 found   on   a  page   of  the   familiar  examination   script,  headed
 'Frodo's  Song', and  were evidently  written before  this point  in the
 manuscript  was  reached.  For  the  earliest  form  of  the   song  see
 note  18.  The  song  has  now  8  verses,  since  both When  morning on
 the  Hill  was  bright  and  From  Wilderland   to  Western   shore  are
 included,  and  the  last verse  in FR  He stood  upon the  bridge alone
 here  appears  as the  penultimate (with  the fourth  line the  cloak of
 grey is cast aside), the final verse being the same  as in  the earliest
 version, Of Moria, of Khazad-dum.                                       
34.  'Earendil, the Evening Star' is spelt thus, not Earendel (see p. 290
 note  22).  -  In Frodo's  question 'why  cannot I  see all  the others'
 (FR  p.  381)  'I'  should  be  italicized;  and   in  Sam's   reply  to
 Galadriel's  question  at  the  end  of  the  chapter  'Did  you  see my
 ring?'  he  should  say  'I  saw  a  star  through  your  fingers',  not
 'finger'.                                                               

                                     XIV.                                   
                             FAREWELL TO LORIEN.                            
                                                                          
 In the earliest materials for this  chapter (without  title) my  father did
 not complete  a continuous  primary text,  but (as  it might  be described)
 continually  took  two  steps  forward  and  one   step  back.   He  halted
 abruptly, even at  mid-sentence, at  certain points  in the  narrative, and
 returned  to  revise  what  he  had  written,  often  more  than  once; the
 result is  a great  deal of  near-repetition and  a very  complex sequence.
 On  the  other hand,  much (though  by no  means all)  of this  drafting is
 written in ink in a quick but  clear and  orderly hand  on good  paper (the
 'August 1940' examination script being now virtually exhausted).          
  The reason for this situation is clear. The first consecutive text  of the
 chapter,  a  well-written  'fair  copy'  manuscript,  stands in  very close
 relation to the draft materials.  By this  time it  had become  my father's
 method  to  begin  making  a  fair  copy  before  a  new  stretch   of  the
 narrative  had  proceeded  very far:  it has  been seen  in 'The  Bridge of
 Khazad-dum'  (p.  202)  and  in  'Lothlorien'  (pp.  221 -  2 and  note 14)
 that  drafting  and  fair  copy  to  some extent  overlapped. This  was the
 case  here  also  (thus  the  extracts from  Keleborn's description  of the
 Great River given on pp. 282  - 3  were drafts  for the  text found  in the
 fair  copy,  and they  immediately preceded  that point  in the  writing of
 that  text), but  to a  much more  marked degree:  for in  this case,  as I
 think, the fair copy was built up in stages, as  the different  sections of
 draft were completed.                                                     
  Before  turning  to  the  original  text,  or  texts,  of   this  chapter,
 however, I give first some very difficult pencilled outlines, which  I will
 call (a), (b) and (c). I take  (a) to  be the  first since  in it  the name
 Tofl-ondren,  which occurs  also in  the others,  is seen  at the  point of
 emergence.  The pencil  is now  faint to  the point  of vanishing,  and the
 first lines  (as far  as 'the  Bridges of  Osgiliath'), which  were written
 before  and  apparently  disconnectedly  from  the  following  portion, are
 partly illegible.                                                         
                                                                          
                                     (a)                                   
                                                                          
    The travellers must choose which side of Anduin [?to be on] at         
  [?Naith]  Lorien.  River is  narrow but...  at Stone Hills.(1) Not         
  possible to cross without a boat until the Bridges of Osgiliath.         

   Keleborn  says  they  must  [?journey]  in   the  morning.   Though  his
 people  do  not often  go outside  borders he  will send  them by  boat as
 far  as  [struck   out:  Toll-ondu   Toll-onnui]  Toll-ondren   the  Great
 Carrock.(2) The  east  bank  is  perilous  to elves.  River winds  among the
 Border  Hills  [struck  out:  Duil]  Emyn Rain.(3) There  they  must decide
 because  the  Wetwang  Palath  Nenui (4) lies  before   them  and   to  reach
 Minas  Tirith  they  must  go west  round and  across [added:  along hills
 and  then  across]  Entwash.  But  to  go  the other  way they  must cross
 Dead Marshes.                                                             
                                                                          
                                    (b)                                    
                                                                          
 This  outline is  also extremely  faint. It  takes up  towards the  end of
 the narrative in this chapter and extends  beyond it,  but was  written at
 an early stage  in the  development of  the story,  since the  presence of
 Elves  accompanying  the  travellers  is mentioned,  and this  element was
 soon abandoned.                                                           
                                                                          
   This is the Naith or Angle.(5) Calendil or the Green Spit.                 
          [Struck out: Nelen] Calennel. (6)                                
   We are come before you to make all ready, said the Lady                 
 Galadriel,  and  now  at  last  we  must  bid you  farewell. Here  you are
 come  at  last  to  the  end  of  our realm,  to Calendil,  the green-spit
 tongue. Green-tine.(7) Three boats await you with rowers.                    
    They get  into the  boats. Elv[en]  archers in  one behind  and before.
 Company  2  in  first,  Ingold,  Boromir.  Hobbits  in  middle.  Legolas,
 Gimli behind.                                                             
 Parting gifts.                                                            
        Warning against Entwash (Ogodruth) and Fangorn (8) - not neces-        
 sary to Boromir and Ingold, but probably Gandalf did not tell them        
 all.                                                                      
    Blessing of Galadriel on Frodo.                                        
    Song of Farewell of Elves.                                             
    Swift passing down the River.                                          
    Description of the [? Green Ravines].                                  
    Tollondren.                                                            
    Scene with Boromir and loss of Frodo.                                  
                      End of Chapter.                                      
                                                                          
 In this outline the names Galadriel and Ingold were written ab initio.
                                                                          
                                    (c)                                    
                                                                          
 This third outline, again in very faint pencil, belongs with the others; a
 further section was added to  it, but  not I  think after  any significant
 interval.                                                                 

 Argument in pavilion at night.                                            
 They postpone decision until they reach Tolondren the Great               
 Carrock.                                                                  
            They sail in [number changed between 2, 3, 4, final figure     
 probably 3] boats. 1 filled with bowmen before and after.                 
 Farewell of Galadriel.                                                    
 They pass into the Rhain hills (9) where river winds in deep ravines.         
 A few arrows from East.                                                   
 Elves give travellers special food and grey cloaks and hoods.             
 They say farewell at Tol Ondren and leave travellers [struck out:         
 a boat > 2 small boats].                                                  
 The  Company  lands  and goes  up into  Rhain Hills  for a  safe place.
 The  debate.  Then  comes  Boromir's  attempt   at  seizing   Ring  and
 Frodo's flight.                                                           
                                                                          
 Arrows from East shore as they pass down river?                           
              The Company lands on Tollondren. Then debate. Frodo (and     
 Sam)  want  to  go  on with  the Quest  and get  it over.  Boromir against
 it  (vehemently?).  They  beg  Elves  to  wait  while  they  decide.  They
 cross  to  East  bank  and  go  up into  Green Hills  (or Emyn  Rhain?) to
 look around.                                                              
                                                                          
 The  journey  by  boat down  Anduin enters  in outline  (a) (see  p. 213);
 in  (b)  the  'scene  with  Boromir  and  loss of  Frodo' is  removed from
 'Angle' (see pp. 207  - 8,  213) and  takes place  after the  journey down
 the river, while in (c) it occurs in the 'Rhain Hills'.                   
 The  geography  of  these  regions  was  coming  into  being.   My  father
 knew  at this  stage that  the Great  River wound  in ravines  (the 'Green
 Ravines'  doubtfully  read  in  outline  (b)?)  through  a range  of hills
 (Stone  Hills;  Emyn  Rhain,  Rhain  Hills,  Border  Hills; Green  Hills -
 which  were not  merely alternative  names, as  will be  seen in  the next
 chapter);  and  that  there was  a great  rock or  tall island  (the Great
 Carrock;  Tolondren, variously  spelt) in  the midst  of Anduin.  This was
 associated  with  the hills,  since the  Company lands  on the  island and
 goes up into Emyn  Rhain or  into the  Green Hills.  In the  added section
 of  (c)  they  cross  the  river  to  do  so.  The  Wetwang  now  appears,
 obviously  if  not  explicitly  associated with  the confluence  of Anduin
 and Entwash (or Ogodruth), flowing out of Fangorn (p. 210).               
                                                                          
 I turn now to the  earliest narrative  texts of  'Farewell to  Lorien', in
 which  indications  are  found that  the fair  copy manuscript  of 'Galad-
 riel' was  already in  existence (notes  10 and  21). The  opening portion
 of  the  chapter,  in  which   the  Company   came  before   Keleborn  and
 Galadriel on the eve of departure and then returned  to their  pavilion to
 debate their course, is extant in several different versions. The earliest
 of  them  begins  clearly  but  soon  descends  to  my  father's  roughest
 script; it was written in ink over a  faint pencilled  text some  of which
 can be read (see note 12).                                                

                                  (i)                                
                                                                    
   That   night (10) the   Company   was    summoned   again    to   the
 chamber  of  Keleborn,  and  the  Lord  and  Lady  of   the  Galadrim
 looked upon their faces. After a silence Keleborn spoke to them.
   'Now  is  the  time,'  he said,  'when those  who wish  to continue
 the  Quest  must  harden  themselves  to  depart.  And  now   is  the
 time for those  to say  farewell to  the Company  who feel  that they
 have gone as far as they have  the strength  to go.  All that  do not
 wish  to  go  forward may  remain here  until there  is a  chance for
 them  to  return  to  their  own  homes.(11) For  we  stand now  on the
 edge of doom;  and ere  long things  will grow  better, or  will grow
 so evil that all must  fight and  fall where  they stand.  There will
 be  no  homes  to  seek, save  the long  home of  those that  go down
 in  battle. Here  you may  abide the  oncoming of  the hour  till the
 ways  of  the  world  lie open  again, or  we summon  you to  help us
 in the last stand of Lorien.'(12)                                   
   'They are all resolved to go forward,' said Galadriel.            
   'As for me,' said Boromir, 'my way home lies onward.'             
   'That  is  true,'  said Keleborn.  'But are  all the  Company going
 with you to Minas Tirith?'                                          
   'We have not decided that yet,' said Ingold.                      
   'But you  must do  so soon,'  said Keleborn.  'For after  you leave
 Lothlorien  the  River  cannot  easily  be  crossed  again  until you
 come  to Ondor,(13) if indeed  the passage  of the  river in  the South
 is  not  held  by  the Enemy.  Now the  way to  Minas Tirith  lies on
 this side of the River, on  the West  bank, but  the straight  way of
 the  Quest  lies  upon  the  other,  upon the  East bank.  You should
 choose before you go.'                                              
   'If they take my advice it will  be the  west side,'  said Boromir,
 'but I am not the leader.'                                          
   'It shall be as you choose.  But as  you seem  still in  doubt, and
 do not maybe wish  to hasten  your choice,  this is  what I  will do.
 It  will  speed  your  journey  somewhat,  and   show  you   my  good
 will  -  for  I  do not  send my  people often  and only  at [?great]
 need  beyond  my  borders.  I will  furnish you  with boats  which we
 use upon the rivers. Some  of my  folk shall  go with  you as  far as
 the  Green  Hills,  where  the  river  winds  deep   among  [?wooded]
 slopes.  But  beyond  the Toll-ondren,  the isle  that is  there amid
 the river flood, they shall not go. Even so far there are  perils for
 Elves upon the East bank; beyond that it is  not safe  for any  to go
 by water.'                                                          
   The words of  Keleborn lightened  their hearts  a little  that were

 heavy   with  the   thought  of   departure.  They   took  leave   of  the
 Lord   and   Lady   and  went   back  to   their  pavilion.   Legolas  was
 with   them.   They   debated  long   but  they   came  to   no  decision.
 Ingold   was   evidently   torn  between   two   things.   His   own  plan
 and   desire   was  to   have  gone   to  Minas   Tirith;  but   now  that
 Gandalf  was  lost  he  felt  that  he  could  not  abandon  Frodo  if  he
 could  not  be  persuaded  to  come.  To  the  others  there   was  little
 choice,  for  they  knew  nothing  of  the...  of the  land in  the South.
 Boromir  said  little  but  kept his  eyes ever  fixed on  Frodo as  if he
 waited  for  his  decision. At  length he  spoke. 'If  you are  to destroy
 the  Ring,'  he  said,  'then  there  is  little  use  in arms,  and Minas
 Tirith  cannot  help  you  greatly.  But  if  you  wish  to   destroy  the
 Lord,  then  there  is  little  use  in  going  without  force   into  his
 domain. That is how it seems to me.'                                      
                                                                          
   Here this text ends.                                                    
                                                                          
                                    (ii)                                   
                                                                          
   The next version is a fair copy of (i) so far as it went, and follows it
 closely,   improving   the   wording   but  introducing   few  significant
 changes; but it extends further into the chapter.                         
   Keleborn  now  speaks  with  greater  certainty  of  the   crossings  of
 Osgiliath: 'it is said  that the  Enemy holds  the passages  [> bridges].'
 Elves of  Lorien shall  go with  the Company  'as far  as the  Green Hills
 where  the  river  winds  among deep  ravines'; here  Rhain is  written in
 pencil  over Green.  'There is  a wooded  island there,  Toll-ondren, amid
 the branching waters. There at last in the  midst of  the stream  you must
 decide your courses,  left or  right.' Above  (Toll-)ondren is  written in
 pencil Galen?, i.e.  Tol Galen:  another use  of a  name from  the legends
 of  the Elder  Days (the  Green Isle  in the  river Adurant  in Ossiriand,
 home of Beren and Luthien after their  return, and  a further  instance of
 an  island  amid  a  river's 'branching  waters' -  from which  indeed the
 Adurant took its name, V.268).                                            
   In the part of this  version that  extends beyond  the point  reached in
 (i)  the  text of  FR (pp.  385 -  6) is  closely approached.  Boromir now
 breaks off  at the  words 'and  no sense  in throwing  away...', finishing
 his  sentence  lamely  after  a  pause  with 'no  sense in  throwing lives
 away, I mean.'  And as  in FR  Ingold was  deep in  his thoughts  and made
 no sign at this, while Merry and Pippin were already asleep.              
   The  passage describing  the bringing  of the  Elvish cakes  and Gimli's
 delight at discovering that they were not cram is  at once  almost exactly
 as in FR, the only difference being that the words 'But we call  it lembas
 or  waybread'  do not  appear. The  description of  the cloaks  is however

 much  briefer  than  in  FR -  and there  is no  mention of  the leaf-shaped
 brooches that fastened them.                                                
                                                                            
   For  each  member  of  the  Company  they  had provided  a grey           
 hood and cloak made according to his size of  the light  but warm           
 silken stuff that the Galadrim used.                                        
   'There is no magic woven in these cloaks,' they said, 'but they           
 should serve you well. They are light to wear,  and at  need warm           
 enough and cool enough in turn...'                                          
                                                                            
 Later,  my  father  would  not  have  the  Elves   introduce  the   idea  of
 'magic' cloaks, and it  is Pippin  who uses  the word,  which the  leader of
 the Elves finds hard to interpret.  The remainder  of the  passage is  as in
 FR, except just at  the end:  'We have  never before  clad strangers  in the
 garb  of our  own people,  certainly never  a dwarf.'  With these  words the
 second text stops abruptly.                                                 
                                                                            
                                    (iii)                                    
                                                                            
   The  next text,  going back  once more  to the  beginning of  the chapter,
 carries  the  number  XX,  showing  that  the  story  of  Galadriel's Mirror
 had  been  separated  off,  as  XIX  'Galadriel',  from  XVIII  'Lothlorien'
 (see  p.  256).  This  manuscript  rapidly  becomes  very complex  through a
 process of  what might  be called  'overlapping false  starts'. The  form in
 FR  is  now  very  closely  approached as  far as  the point  where Keleborn
 says 'I see that you have not decided this matter' (cf. FR p. 383). It is to
 be  noted  that  Ingold  was  changed subsequently,  at both  occurrences in
 the  opening  dialogue,  first  to  Elfstone  and then  to Trotter  (see pp.
 277  -  8).  Keleborn  now  says:  'And  are  not  the bridges  of Osgiliath
 broken  down,  and  the  passages  of  the  river  held  now  by  the  Enemy
 since  his  late  assault?'(14) But  from  the  point  mentioned  the  story is
 developed thus:                                                             
                                                                            
   'I  see  that  you  have  not  decided  this  matter,  nor  yet  made any
 plan,'  said  Keleborn.  'It  is  not  my  part  to choose  for you,  but I
 will  do  what  I  can  to  help  you.  Are  there   any  among   you  that
 can manage boats upon a strong river?'                                      
   Boromir   laughed.   'I   was   born  between   the  mountains   and  the
 sea,  on   the  borders   of  the   Land  of   Seven  Streams,'(15) he said,
 'and the Great River flows through Ondor.'                                  
   'I  have  journeyed  by  boat  on  many   rivers,'  said  Ingold;(16) 'and
 Legolas   here   is   from   the   elf-folk  of   Mirkwood  who   use  both
 rafts  and  boats  on  the Forest  River. One  at least  of the  hobbits is
 of  the  riverside  folk  that  live  on  the   banks  of   Baranduin.  The
 rest  can  at  least  sit  still.  They  have all  now passed  through such

                                                               
                                                                         
 perils  that  I  do  not  think  a   journey  by   boat  would   seem  so
 terrible as once it might.'                                              
   'That  is  well,'  said  Keleborn.  'Then  I  will  furnish   you  with
 two  small  boats.  They  must  be  small and  light, for  if you  go far
 by  river  there  are places  where you  will have  to carry  your craft:
 there  are  the  falls  of  Rhain  where  the  River  runs  out   of  the
 ravines  in  the  Green  Hills,(17) and  other  places  where no  boat can
 pass.  [The  following  struck out  as soon  as written:  This I  will do
 to  show  you  my  good  will.  Two  Elves  shall guide  you for  a short
 way,  but  far  abroad  I  cannot  permit  my  folk  to  stray  in  these
 evil  days.  But  when  you  leave  the  River,  as  you  must  whichever
 way  you  go  at  the  last,  I  ask  only  that  you should  not destroy
 my  boats  save  only  to  keep  them  from  the   orcs,  and   that  you
 should  draw  them  ashore  and]  In  this  way  your  journey   will  be
 made  less  toilsome  for  a  while,  though  perhaps not  less perilous.
 How  far  you  can  go  by  water  who  now  can  tell?  And the  gift of
 boats   will   not   decide   your   purpose:   it   may   postpone  your
 choice, yet  at the  last you  must leave  the River  and go  either east
 or west.'                                                                
   Ingold  thanked  Keleborn   many  times   in  the   name  of   all  the
 Company.   The   offer   of   the   boats   comforted   him   much,   and
 indeed  it  cheered  most  of  the  travellers.  Their hearts  were heavy
 with  the  thought  of  leaving  Lothlorien,  but  now  for  a  while the
 toils  of  the  road  at  least  would  be  lessened, though  the dangers
 doubtless  would  remain.  Sam  only  felt  a little  alarm. In  spite of
 all the perils he had now passed through                                 
                                                                         
                                   (iv)                                   
                                                                         
   Here  the third  text breaks  off, and  all from  'Are there  any among
 you  that  can  manage  boats  upon  a strong  river?' was  rejected, and
 begun  again;  the  narrative  now  becoming  close  to  the form  in FR:
 'There  are  some  at  least among  you that  can handle  boats: Legolas,
 whose folk go on  rafts and  boats on  the Forest  River; and  Boromir of
 Ondor, and Ingold  [> Elfstone]  the traveller.'  The Elves  to accompany
 them down the River  have now  gone; and  the falls  of Rhain  'where the
 River  runs  out  of the  ravines in  the Green  Hills' become  the Falls
 of Rosfein (with the same comment).                                      
   After  Ingold  (>  Elfstone  >  Trotter)  had  thanked   Keleborn,  and
 after the account of the lightened hearts of all the travellers,(18) the new
 text  continues  with  Keleborn's words  'All shall  be prepared  for you
 and  await  you  before  noon  tomorrow at  the haven'  (FR p.  384); but
 whereas in texts (i) and (ii) - as in FR - Keleborn's  offer of  boats is

  followed  by  the  withdrawal  of  the  Company  to  their   pavilion,  and
  there is no mention of  gifts, this  new version  has Galadriel  say: 'Good
  night, fair guests! But before you  go I  have here  parting gifts  which I
  beg  you  to  take,  and  remember   the  Galadrim   and  their   Lord  and
  Lady.' The outline  (b) on  p. 268,  obviously earlier  than the  stage now
  reached since there is mention in  it of  Elves going  with the  Company in
  boats, placed the Parting Gifts  at the  time of  the final  departure down
  the  River,  and  this  must  have  been  my  father's  original intention,
  which  he  now  temporarily  changed.  In  this  version  (iv)   there  now
  follows the recital of the gifts to each member of the Company.           
    Galadriel's gift  to Ingold  (the name  not here  changed) is  the sheath
  that  had  been  made  to  fit  his  sword,  which  is   called  Branding:(19)
  overlaid  with silver  and with  runes of  gold declaring  the name  of the
  sword and  its owner.  Nothing more  is said,  and there  is no  mention of
  the  great green  stone (FR  p. 391).  Boromir's belt  of gold,  the silver
  belts  for  Merry  and  Pippin,  and  the  bow  of  the  Galadrim  given to
  Legolas,  appear  and  are  described  in   the  same   words  as   in  FR.
  Galadriel's gift  to Sam  and her  words to  him are  almost exactly  as in
  FR.  The  box  containing  earth  from  her  garden  was   'unadorned  save
  for a single flowering rune upon the lid' ('a single silver rune,'  FR). On
  the  manuscript page  my father  drew an  Old English  G-rune ('X')  in the
  form of two flowering branches crossed one upon the other:(20)           
                                                                           
                                   
                                                                           
                                                   
                                                                           
                                                        
                                                     
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                           
                                 
                                                                           
                                              
                                                                           
  The  word   'flowering'  was   later  crossed   out,  and   another,  purely
  formal elaboration  of the  rune was  drawn at  the head  of the  next page:

   The gift to Gimli differs, however, from his gift in FR, and  differ's in
 the most remarkable way.                                                   
                                                                           
   'And  what  gift  would  a  dwarf  ask  of  Elves?'  said  the   Lady  to
 Gimli.                                                                     
   None,   Lady,   answered   Gimli.   It   is   enough   for  me   to  have
 seen   the   Lady   of  the   Galadrim  and   known  her   graciousness.  I
 will treasure the memory of her words at our first meeting.'(21       
   [Rejected,  but  not  struck  out,  as  soon   as  written:   Hear,  all
 you  Elves!'  said  the  Lady,  turning  to  those  about  her.   'And  say
 not  that  dwarves  are  all  rough  and  ungracious,  grasping   at  gifts
 and  /  I  have  heard   it  said   that  dwarves   are  openhanded   -  to
 receive,  and  count  their  words  -  when  they  give  thanks']   'It  is
 well   that   those   about  me   should  hear   your  fair   words,'  said
 Galadriel,   'and   may   they   never   again   say   that   dwarves   are
 grasping  and  ungracious.  Let  this  small  token  be  given  as  a  sign
 that   goodwill   may   be   remade   between   dwarves   and   elves,   if
 better  days  should  come.'   She  put   her  hand   to  her   throat  and
 unclasped  a  brooch,  and  gave  it  to  Gimli.  On  it  was   an  emerald
 of  deep  green  set  in  gold. 'I  will set  it near  my heart,'  he said,
 bowing  to  the  floor,  'and  Elfstone  shall  be  a  name  of  honour  in
 my [?kin] for ever, and like a leaf [?amid]... gold.'                      
                                                                           
 Once  again  the  text  was   stopped  short,   before  Frodo's   gift  was
 reached.  Beneath  the  last  words  my  father  wrote:  Elfstone  Elfhelm,
 and then:                                                                  
                                                                           
   'Hail, Elfstone,' she said.  'It is  a fair  name that  merits a  gift to
 match.'                                                                    
                                                                           
 It was clearly at this point that 'the Elfstone' first emerged, as  a green
 gem  set in  a brooch  worn by  Galadriel and  given as  a parting  gift to
 Gimli;  and  it  seems  equally  plain that  my father  immediately adopted
 it (or more  accurately, re-adopted  it) as  the true  name of  Trotter. To
 this question I will return in a moment.                                   
                                                                           
                                     (v)                                    
                                                                           
   He  now  started  again  from  Keleborn's  words  'All shall  be prepared
 for  you  and  await  you  at  the  haven before  noon tomorrow'  (p. 273),
 and  repeated  what  he  had  written  of  the  gifts  to  Boromir,  Merry,
 Pippin,  and  Sam,  but  omitting  Ingold;  and  now  Gimli's  request  and
 gift  (a  strand  of  Galadriel's  hair)  are  told word  for word  as they
 appear in FR (pp. 392  - 3),  the sole  difference being  that at  the end,
 after  'and  yet over  you gold  shall have  no dominion',  Galadriel said:
 'Dark  are  the  waters  of  Kheledzaram,  yet  there  maybe you  shall one

 day see a light.' The phial in which  was caught  the light  of Earendel's
 star,(22) her gift to Frodo, now appears,  and this  passage also  is almost
 word for word as in FR.                                                   
   It  looks  as if  Ingold's gift  was omitted  inadvertently; or  else my
 father  may have  briefly intended  to make  it the  last. There  are four
 versions describing it, the final one being a  rider marked  for insertion
 into the text at the beginning of the gift-giving.                        
   It has been seen that the Elfstone was at first the  gift to  Gimli, and
 that Gimli in accepting it took it  also as  a name;  but that  the moment
 he had set this down my father wrote:  ' "Hail,  Elfstone," she  said. "It
 is a  fair name  that merits  a gift  to match" ';  and this  is obviously
 addressed  to  Trotter.  The  variant  versions  of  the   description  of
 Galadriel's gift to the  leader of  the Company  are developed  from this;
 and  the  pages  on  which they  stand are  covered with  names: Elfstone,
 Elfstone  son  of  Elfhelm,  Elfstan,  Eledon, Aragorn,  Eldakar, Eldamir,
 Qendemir. There is no  need to  cite these  successive variants  except in
 their opening sentences, until the last, which I give in full.            
   (1) 'Eledon!' she said to Trotter. 'Elfstone you are named; it is a fair
 name, and my gift shall match it.' (She then gives him a green gem.)      
   (2) 'Elfstone,' she said. 'It is a fair name...' (as  in 1,  except that
 here she unclasps the gem from her throat).                               
   (3) 'Here is the gift of  Keleborn to  the leader  of the  Company,' she
 said to Trotter...' (continuing as in the final version, 4).              
   (4) (The version inserted into the text)                                
                                                                          
   'Here  is  the  gift  of  Keleborn  to  the  leader  of  your  Company,'
 she  said  to  Elfstone  [>  Trotter],  and  gave  him  a sheath  that had
 been  made  to  fit  his  sword.  It  was  overlaid  with  a   tracery  of
 flowers  and  leaves  wrought  of  silver  and  gold, and  on it  were set
 in   runes   formed   of   many   gems   the   name   Branding   and   the
 lineage  of  the  sword.  'The  blade  that  is  drawn  from  this  sheath
 shall  not  be  stained  or broken  even in  defeat,' she  said. 'Elfstone
 is  your  name,  Eldamir  in  the  language  of   your  fathers   of  old,
 and it is a fair name. I will add this gift of my own to match it.'(23)   
 She  put  her  hand  to  her  throat  and  unclasped from  a fine  chain a
 gem  that  hung  before  her breast.  It was  a stone  of clear  green set
 in  a  band  of  silver.  'All  growing  things that  you look  at through
 this,'  she  said,  'you  will  see  as they  were in  their youth  and in
 their  spring.  It  is  a  gift  that  blends  joys  and sorrow;  yet many
 things   that   now   appear   loathly   shall   seem  otherwise   to  you
 hereafter.'                                                               
                                                                          
   The   seeming   conundrum   presented   by  the   bewildering  movements
 in  the names  which replaced  'Aragorn' in  this phase  of the  work must
 now be confronted.                                                        

   For  all   the  apparently   contradictory  changes,   whereby  Aragorn
 becomes  Elfstone  but  Elfstone  also  becomes  Aragorn,   and  Elfstone
 becomes Ingold but Ingold also becomes Elfstone, it is in  fact perfectly
 clear  that  the first  change was  from Aragorn  to Elfstone.  This took
 place in the course  of the  writing of  the original  draft of  the long
 'Lothlorien' chapter (see p. 262 note 6) and in the  fair copy  (p. 236).
 That this  is so  is confirmed  and explained  by a  note on  the 'August
 1940' examination script:                                               
                                                                        
   NB.  Since  Aragorn  [>  Trotter]  is  a  man  and  the   common  speech
   (especially  of mortals)  is represented  by English,  then he  must not
   have an Elvish name. Change to Elfstone son of Elfhelm.               
                                                                        
 Beside this are written other names, Elf-friend, Elfspear, Elfmere.  It
 was now  that Aragorn  (or Trotter)  was changed  to Elfstone  in earlier
 chapters;(24) but at this stage the name 'Elf-stone' will not have  had any
 particular significance or association.                                 
   That  Ingold  was a  replacement of  Elfstone is  shown by  its appear-
 ance ab  initio (i.e.  not as  a correction  of an  earlier name)  in the
 overwritten part of the original draft of  the 'Lothlorien'  story, where
 Elfstone can be read in the primary pencilled text  beneath (p.  262 note
 6).  This  change  is the  subject of  another note  written on  the same
 paper as the first:                                                     
                                                                        
   Instead of  Aragorn son  of Kelegorn  and instead  of the  later variant
   Elfstone son of Elfhelm use  Ingold son  of Ingrim;  since Trotter  is a
   man  he  should  not  have  a  Gnome-elvish   name  like   Aragorn.(25) The
   Ing- element here can represent the 'West'.                           
                                                                        
 Some texts, therefore, call him Ingold from  the first;  and at  the same
 time Ingold replaced (in principle) Elfstone in  texts already  extant at
 this time.                                                              
   When my father wrote  the first  version of  the Parting  Gifts passage
 (p. 275) the gift of Galadriel to Gimli of the green gem set in  gold was
 totally unforeseen,  as was  Gimli's thereupon  taking the  name Elfstone
 to be 'a name of honour' in his  kin. At  that very  moment a  sudden new
 possibility  and  connection  emerged.  Trotter  had  been  for  a  while
 Elfstone - a name chosen for linguistic reasons;  that had  been rejected
 and replaced by Ingold; but  now it  turned out  that Elfstone  was after
 all the  right name.  The Elfstone  was the  Lady's gift  to him,  not to
 Gimli; and in giving it to him she made a play on his name.             
   The  next  step,  therefore,  and  principal  '  cause of  the apparent
 confusion,  was  a  reversion  from the  short-lived Ingold  to Elfstone,
 and the chain of changes now becomes:                                   
          Aragorn (or Trotter) > Elfstone > Ingold > Elfstone            
   The  further emendation  of this  new Elfstone  to Trotter  (pp. 272-3,
 276)  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  Elfstone  had   been  abandoned
 again as his real  name, but  rather that  my father  now wished  to make

  his name Trotter for general use in the immediate  narrative (thus  he is
  Trotter  throughout  the fair  copy manuscript  of 'Farewell  to Lorien',
  see p. 293). Ultimately Aragorn returned; and thus the circular series is
  completed:                                                               
  Aragorn  (or  Trotter)  >  Elfstone  >  Ingold >  Elfstone (>  Trotter) >
                                   Aragorn                                 
  This  series  appears  in  more  or  less fragmentary  form in  the manu-
  scripts (cf. p. 244 note 52) for various reasons, but largely  because my
  father carried  out the  corrections to  the extant  texts at  each stage
  rather haphazardly.  In some  cases only  parts of  the series  are found
  because in  these cases  the succession  of changes  was already  more or
  less advanced;  in some  cases the  expected change  is not  made because
  the  text  was  rejected  before  the  occasion for  it arose  (note 16).
  Running  through  and  crossing  this  is the  name Trotter,  which might
  be  changed  or  retained  according  to  my  father's  changing  view of
  when it should be employed.                                              
    Afterwards,  of  course,  when  Galadriel  gave  Aragorn  the  Elfstone
  she conferred on him the name 'that was  foretold' for  him (FR  p. 391);
  Aragorn became Elessar, the  Elfstone in  that hour.  On the  history and
  properties of the Elfstone or Elessar see Unfinished  Tales pp.  248 ff.;
  cf. especially 'For it is said that those who  looked through  this stone
  saw things that  were withered  or burned  healed again  or as  they were
  in the grace of their youth.' In FR nothing is said of the  properties of
  the stone.                                                               
                                                                          
    This text (v) continues - since the gift-giving took place on  the last
  night,  in  the  chamber  of  Keleborn  and  Galadriel  - with  a further
  version  of the  debate of  the Company,  and the  gifts next  morning of
  elven-cloaks  and  food  for  the  journey.  The  text  of FR  is further
  approached  in  many  details of  wording; but  of Trotter's  thoughts on
  the question of what they should do now this is said:                    
                                                                          
    Elfstone [>  Trotter] was  himself divided  in mind.  His own          
  plan  and  desire had  been to  go with  Boromir, and  with his          
  sword  help  to  deliver Ondor.  For he  had believed  that the          
  message of the dreams was a  summons, and  that there  in Minas          
  Tirith he would become  a great  lord, and  maybe would  set up          
  again the throne of Elendil's line, and defend the West against          
  assault.  But  in  Moria  he  had  taken  on  himself Gandalf's          
  burden...                                                                
                                                                          
    The remainder of the debate is  now virtually  as in  FR (p.  385), the
  only  difference  being  that  the  sentence   'He  [Boromir]   had  said
  something  like  this  at  the  Council,  but  then  he had  accepted the
  correction of Elrond' is here absent. The  passage concerning  the cloaks
  remains  the same  as in  the previous  draft (p.  272), except  that the

 Elves  now add  that 'All  who see  you clad  thus will  know that  you are
 friends  of  the  Galadrim',  and the  words 'certainly  never a  dwarf are
 omitted.  Thus  there  is  still  no  mention  of  the  detail,  afterwards
 important,  that  each  cloak  was  fastened  with  a  leaf-shaped  brooch.
 But the sentence  previously absent  (p. 271),  'But we  call it  lembas or
 waybread', now appears.                                                    
                                                                           
                                    (vi)                                    
                                                                           
   For  the  next  part  of  the  chapter,  from  'After their  morning meal
 they said farewell to the lawn by the fountain'  (FR p.  386), the  form of
 the  text  changes,  though  the  actual  writing  was  clearly  continuous
 with what precedes.  There was  first a  draft in  very faint  pencil which
 went as far as  the Elves'  warning about  the handling  of the  boats, and
 then became an outline of the further course of the narrative:             
                                                                           
    They  were  arranged   thus.  Elfstone   and  Frodo   and  Sam   in  one,
   Boromir  and  Merry  and  Pippin  in  another,  and  in  a  third  Legolas
   and  Gimli  (  ...  dwarf  become  more  friendly).(26) The last  boat being
   more  lightly   burdened  with   passengers  took   more  of   the  packs.
   They  are  steered  and  driven  by  broad-bladed  paddles.  They practise
   on  advice  of  Elves  and  though  they  will  only  be  going downstream
   practise going up the Silverlode.                                        
    Thus  they  meet  the  Lord   and  Lady   in  their   swan-shaped  barge.
   Curved  neck,  and  jewelled  eyes,  and  half-raised  wings. They  take a
   meal  on  the grass  and then  a last  farewell. Here  comes in  advice of
   Keleborn and last farewell of Galadriel.                                 
    Frodo  looks  back  and  sees  in  the  westering  sun  upon the  haven a
   tall, slender, and sad figure  with an  upraised hand.  Last sight  of the
   Ring of Earth. (He never saw it again?)                                  
    Song of Galadriel.                                                      
                                                                           
 On top of the pencilled draft my father wrote a  new text  in ink,  so that
 virtually all - except the outline just given, which was left intact  - was
 obliterated.  He  then  continued  this  new text,  which soon  became very
 rough and  petered out  at Keleborn's  invitation to  eat with  them. Since
 this  was  in  turn  overtaken  by  a  further  version  which  followed it
 closely so far as it went, nothing is lost by turning at once to that.     
                                                                           
                                    (vii)                                   
                                                                           
   This text is in soft pencil on large  and now  very battered  sheets, but
 legible. The story as  told in  FR appears  fully formed,  even to  much of
 its  wording,  and I  shall not  give it  in full;  there are  however many
 interesting features of names and geography.                               
   With  Haldir, returned  from the  'northern fences'  and acting  as guide
 to  the  Company  from  Caras  Galadon,  his brother  Orofin came  also. It

 is said that 'Haldir brought news':  ' "There  are strange  things happen-
 ing  away  back there,"  he said.  "We do  not know  the meaning  of them.
 But the Dimrill Dale  is full  of clouds  of smoke  and vapour..."  ' (see
 note 11).                                                                 
   The Tongue is thus described (cf. FR p. 387):                           
                                                                          
 The  lawn  ran  out  into  a  narrow  tongue   of  green   between  bright
 margins:   on   the   right   and   west   glittered   the   narrower  and
 swifter  waters  of  the  Silverlode,  and on  the left  and east  ran the
 broader  greener  waters  of  the  Great  River.  On  the  far  banks  the
 woodlands   still   marched  southwards   as  far   as  they   could  see,
 but  beyond  the  Naith  or  Angle  (as  the   elves  called   this  green
 sward)  and  upon  the  east  side  of  the  Great  River  all  the boughs
 were bare. No mallorn-trees grew there.(27)                               
                                                                          
 On 'Naith or Angle' as  a name  of the  Tongue see  note 5.  This sentence
 was  corrected,  probably  at  once,  to: 'but  beyond the  Tongue (Lamben
 the elves  called this  green sward)';  then the  words 'Lamben  the elves
 called this green  sward' were  in turn  crossed out.  On Elvish  names of
 the Tongue see p. 268 and note 6.                                         
   The  passage  in  FR  concerning  the  ropes   and  Sam's   interest  in
 rope-making is wholly absent,  just as  his realisation  too late  that he
 has  no  rope before  leaving Rivendell  (p. 165)  and his  bemoaning that
 he  has  none  in  Moria (p.  183) are  also lacking.(28) The old  text reads
 here:                                                                     
                                                                          
 Three   small   grey   boats   had   already   been   prepared   for   the
 travellers, and in these the elves stowed their goods.                    
   'You  must  take  care,'  they  said.  'The  boats are  light-built, and
 they  will  be  more  deeply  laden   than  they   should  be,   when  you
 go   aboard.  It   would  be   wise  if   you  accustomed   yourselves  to
 getting  in  and  out  here,  where  there  is  a   landing-place,  before
 you set off downstream.'                                                  
                                                                          
   In the first draft (vi) of this passage Trotter is here called Elfstone,
 and it is said that 'Trotter led them up the  Silverlode'; in  this second
 version (vii) he is Eldamir at both occurrences, replaced (at the  time of
 writing) by Trotter. Eldamir ('Elfstone')  appears in  Galadriel's address
 to him at the time of her parting gifts (p. 276); as will be seen shortly,
 my  father  was  on  the  point  of  removing  the  gift-giving  from the
 evening  before their  departure to  their final  farewell on  the Tongue,
 and  this  apart  from  any  other  consideration  would  probably explain
 his removing Eldamir at this point in the story.                          
   A curious detail  in the  description of  the swan-boat  was subsequent-
 ly removed:                                                               
                                                                          
 Two elves, clad in white, steered it with black paddles so                

                                          
                                                                        
 contrived that the blades folded back, as a swan's foot does,           
 when they were thrust forward in the water.                             
                                                                        
 It may be that my father saw this as  too much  of a  'contrivance', too
 much a  matter of  ingenious carpentry.  - There  is no  suggestion that
 Galadriel's song on the swan-boat, though it is referred to in  the same
 words as in FR, was or would be reported.                               
  Where FR has 'There in the last end  of Egladil  upon the  green grass'
 (see note  5), this  earliest version  had 'There  in the  green Angle',
 changed to 'There in the Tongue of Lorien';  this was  a change  made at
 the  time  of  composition. The  description of  Galadriel as  Frodo saw
 her then is almost exactly as in FR; but as my father wrote it there was
 included in it a notable phrase which he (then or later) struck out:
                                                                        
 She  seemed  no  longer  perilous  or  terrible,  nor  full   of  hidden
 power;   but   elven-fair   she   seemed   beyond   desire   of   heart.
 Already  she  appeared  to  him  (since  her  refusal  in the garden)(29)
 as  by  men of  later days  elves at  times are  seen: present,  and yet
 remote,  a  living  vision  of  that  which   has  already   passed  far
 down the streams of time.                                               
                                                                        
  I cite in full the text of Keleborn's advice to the Company:           
                                                                        
  As  they  ate  and  drank,  sitting  upon  the  grass,  Keleborn  spoke
 to  them  again  of  their  journey,  and  lifting  his hand  he pointed
 south  to  the  woods   beyond  the   Tongue.  'As   you  go   down  the
 water,'  he  said,  'you  will  find that  for a  while the  trees march
 on.  For  of  old  the  Forest of  Lorien was  far greater  [added: than
 the small realm which we still maintain between the rivers].(30)        
 Even  yet  evil  comes  seldom  under  the  trees  that  remain  [added:
 from ancient days].  But you  will find  that at  length the  trees will
 fail,  and  then  the river  will carry  you through  a bare  and barren
 country   /   before   it   flows  [replaced   by:  winding   among  the
 Border  Hills  before  it  falls  down]  into  the  sluggish  region  of
 Nindalf.   The  Wetwang   men  call   it,  a   marshy  land   where  the
 streams   are   tortuous   and   much   divided:   there   the   Entwash
 River  flows  in   from  the   West.  Beyond   that  are   [struck  out:
 Emyn   Rhain   the   Border   Hills   and]   the    Nomenlands,   dreary
 Uvanwaith  that  lies  before  the  passes  of  Mordor.  When  the trees
 fail,  you  should  travel  only  by dusk  and dark  and even  then with
 watchfulness.  The  arrows  of  the  orcs are  bitter and  fly straight.
 Whether  you  will  journey  on  by  river  after  the  falls  I  do not
 know.   But   beyond   the   Entwash   it   may   be  that   [Ingold  >]
 Elfstone (31) and  Boromir  know  the  lands  well  enough  to   need  no
 counsel.  If  you  decide  to  go  west  to  Minas  Tirith, you  will do

 best to leave the river where the  isle of  Toll-ondren stands  in the
 stream  above  the  falls  of  Rosfein  and  cross  the  Entwash above
 the  marshes.  But you  will be  wise not  to go  far up  that stream,
 or  to  risk becoming  entangled in  the Forest  of Fangorn.  But that
 warning I need hardly give to a man of Minas Tirith.'                 
   'Indeed  we   have  heard   of  Fangorn   in  Minas   Tirith,'  said
 Boromir.  'But  what  I  have  heard  seem  to  me  for the  most part
 old wives' tales, such as are told to our children. For all  that lies
 north  of  Rohan  seems  now  to  us  so  far  away  that   fancy  can
 wander  freely  there.  Of  old  Fangorn  lay  upon  the  borders  [of
 the  realm  of  Anarion  >] of  our realm;  but it  is now  many lives
 of men since any of us  visited it  to prove  or disprove  the legends
 that  have  survived.  I  have  not  myself  been  there.  When  I was
 sent  out  as a  messenger -  being chosen  as one  hardy and  used to
 mountain-paths,  I   went  round   by  the   south  about   the  Black
 Mountains  and  up  the  Greyflood  -  or  the  Seventh  River  as  we
 call it.(32) A long  and  weary journey  [struck out:  but not  at that
 time  yet  one of  great peril,  other than  from thirst  and hunger].
 Four   hundred  leagues   I  reckoned   it,  and   it  took   me  many
 months,  for I  lost my  horses at  the crossing  of the  Greyflood at
 Tharbad.(33) After  that   journey,  and   the  road   I  have   so  far
 travelled  with  this  Company,  I  do  not  much  doubt that  I shall
 find a way through Rohan, and Fangorn too, if need be.'               
   'Then  I  will  say  no  more,'  said Keleborn.  'But do  not wholly
 forget the old wives' tales! '                                        
                                                                      
   Then follows: 'Remove the gift scene and place it at this point just
 before drink of farewell.'                                            
                                                                      
   On an isolated page are two further versions of  Keleborn's descrip-
 tion of the Great River, immediately preparatory to the passage in the
 fair copy manuscript, and both beginning in mid-sentence. The first of
 these was at once replaced by the second and need only be cited in its
 opening sentences: (34)                                               
                                                                      
  (i) [For of old the Forest of Lorien] was greater than it now  is, and
  even yet evil  comes seldom  under the  trees upon  the shores  of the
  River.  But after  some nine  leagues you  will be  brought to  a bare
  and barren country  of heath  and stone,  and the  river will  wind in
  deep ravines until it divides about the  tall island  of Tolondren....
                                                                      
 (ii) [you will find that] the trees will fail, and you will come  to a
 barren  country.  There  the  river  flows in  stony vales  among high
 moors,  until  it comes  to the  tall island  of Tolondren.  About the
 rocky shores of the isle it casts its arms, and then falls  with noise

                                                                 
                                                                             
 and   smoke   over   the   cataracts   of   Rhosfein   [written    above   in
 pencil:  Dant-ruin]  down  into  the  Nindalf   -  the   Wetwang  as   it  is
 called  in  your  speech.  That  is  a  wide  region  of sluggish  fen, where
 the    stream    becomes    tortuous    and    much   divided;    there   the
 Entwash   river   flows   in   by   many  mouths   from  the   West.  Beyond,
 on  this  side  of  the  Great  River, lies  Rohan. On  the further  side are
 the  bleak  hills  of  Sarn-gebir  [in   version  (i)   Sarn >   Sern  Gebir].
 The  wind  blows  from  the  East  there,   for  they   look  out   over  the
 Dead   Marshes   and   the   Nomenlands   [in   version   (i)    the   Nomen-
 lands (of Uvanwaith)] to the passes of Mordor: Kirith Ungol.                 
                                                                             
 This passage in its variant  forms is  the fullest  account of  the geography
 of  these  regions  yet  encountered,  and  I postpone  discussion of  it, in
 relation  to  the  earliest  map  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings, to  the next
 chapter.                                                                     
                                                                             
 Despite  his direction  to bring  in the  gift scene  'just before  the drink
 of  farewell'  (p.  282)  my  father  now  changed  his mind,  and introduced
 the cup of parting  here, in  the same  place as  in FR  (pp. 390-1),  and in
 the  same  words,  except  that  Galadriel  first  said  'though the  hour of
 shadow  has  come  in  its   appointed  time',   and  then   'though  shadows
 long   foretold   approach',   before   her   words   in  FR   were  reached:
 'though   night   must  follow   noon,  and   already  our   evening  draweth
 nigh.' After 'Then  she called  to each  in turn'  my father  directed: 'Here
 take  in  gift-scene  (in short  or longer  form).' The  'short form'  of the
 scene is found under  the heading  'If the  gift-scene is  cut out,  or down,
 it might run thus."                                                          
                                                                             
 To  each  of  the  guests  she  gave  a  small  brooch  shaped like  a golden
 flower   with   three   leaves  of   jewelled  green.   'This  shall   be  in
 remembrance  of  Lothlorien,'  she  said,  'and  all  elves  that  see  these
 shall  know  that  you  are  friends.  For  you  two,'  she said,  turning to
 Frodo  and  Sam,  'I  have  also  small  gifts  of  my  own   in  remembrance
 of our  last meeting.  To you,  little gardener  and lover  of trees,  I will
 give  this,  though  it  may  seem  little to  look on.  She beckoned  to Sam
 and laid in his hand (... so to end of Sam... )                              
 'And for you, Frodo, I have prepared this,' she said...                      
                                                                             
 (The last part of this text is written thus in the original.)                
                                                                             
                                    (viii)                                    
                                                                             
 The  conclusion of  the chapter  in its  earliest extant  form is  written in
 ink  in  clear script  with little  hesitation in  the phrasing,  and closely
 approaches  FR   (despite  very   many  small   differences  in   the  actual
 words).  The  feeling  of  the  Company  as  the  River  bore them  away from
 Lorien  is  expressed  thus (and  is the  first suggestion  of the  idea that

 Lorien  existed  in  a  mode  of  Time  distinct from  that of  the world
 beyond its borders, unless it is present in Keleborn's words on  p. 249):
                                                                         
 Lorien  was   slipping  backward   like  a   green  vessel   masted  with
 trees  sailing  to  forgotten  shores,  while  they  were  cast  again on
 the grey never-halting water of time.                                    
                                                                         
   Galadriel's  song  heard  in  the  distance as  the boats  slipped down
 Anduin is not recorded; indeed there is a clear  suggestion that  when he
 first wrote  this concluding  passage my  father did  not intend  that it
 should be (although the words 'Song of  Galadriel' in  the outline  on p.
 279 perhaps suggest otherwise):                                          
                                                                         
 But she sang  in [the  ancient elvish  tongue >]  some ancient           
 hidden tongue, and he heard not the  words. [Added:  The music           
 was fair but it bore no heart's ease.] Then suddenly the river           
 swept round a bend and the banks rose  upon either  side. They           
 saw her never more. Turning now their  faces to  their journey           
 they faced the sun...                                                    
                                                                         
   The  initial  workings  for  Galadriel's  songs were  nonetheless found
 with the earliest manuscripts  of this  chapter, both  her song  upon the
 swan-boat (of  which there  is also  a finished  text) and  Namarie'. The
 completed form of the first reads:                                       
                                                                         
   I sang o f leaves, o f leaves o f gold, and leaves o f gold there grew:
 Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.             
 Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,                
   And by the strand o f Tirion there grew a golden Tree.                 
 Beneath the stars of Evereve in Eldamar it shone,(35)                    
 In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion.                             
 But far away and far away beyond the Shadow-meres                        
 Now long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching                 
   years.                                                                 
 And Lorien, 0 Lorien! the river flows away                               
 And leaves are falling in the stream, and leaves are borne away;         
 0 Lorien, too long I dwell upon this Hither Shore                        
 And in a fading crown I twine the golden elanor.                        
 But if a ship I now should sing, what ship would come to me,             
 What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a sea?                  
                                                                         
 Pencilled changes bring the  song in  all points  to the  form in  FR. My
 father  was  working  at  the  same time  on the  Elvish song,  which had
 reached this form:                                                       
                                                                         
                   Ai! laurie lantar lassi surinen                        
                   inyalemine ramar aldaron                               

           inyali ettulielle turme marien                                   
           anduniesse la miruvorion                                         
           Varda  telumen  falmar  kirien                                   
           laurealassion  omar  mailinon.                                   
                                                                           
           Elentari Vardan Oiolossean                                      
           Tintallen mali ramar ortelumenen                                 
           arkandava-le qantamalle tulier                                   
           e falmalillon morne sindanorie                                    
           no mirinoite kallasilya Valimar.                                 
                                                                           
  I  have  mentioned  earlier (p.  266) the  very close  relationship between
 the  writing  of  the  foregoing  drafts and  the writing  of the  fair copy
 manuscript; and the  result of  this mode  of composition  is that  there is
 very  little  that  need  be  said  about  the  new  text  (numbered  XX but
 without title: 'Farewell to Lorien' was pencilled in later).               
  In  Keleborn's  words  to  the  Company on  the last  evening (see  p. 273)
 he still speaks of 'the great falls of Rosfein, where the River runs  out of
 the  ravines  among  the  Green  Hills',  but this  was changed,  before the
 manuscript  was  completed,  to   'where  the   River  thunders   down  from
 Sarn-gebir'.  His  parting  advice  at  the  Tongue  on  the   following  day
 naturally scarcely differs from the  text (pp.  282 -  3) which  was written
 for this place in the fair copy (note 34); but  'the cataracts  of Rhosfein'
 become  'the  cataracts  of  Dant-ruinel'   (Dant-ruin  is   pencilled  over
 Rhosfein  in  the  draft  text),  and  at  the end  of the  passage Keleborn
 says, not 'to the passes  of Mordor:  Kirith Ungol',  but 'to  Kirith Ungol,
 and the gates of Mordor'.                                                  
  Pencilled  alterations  to  the  passage  in   the  fair   copy  manuscript
 changed  Tolondren  to  Eregon,  then  to  Brandor,  then  to  the  Tindrock
 that  we  call  Tol  Brandor;  and  Dant-ruinel  to  Rauros  (with  marginal
 notes  Rauros  =  'Rush-rain'  or  'Roar-rain').  At  this  time  Rosfein in
 Keleborn s earlier speech was changed to Rauros.(36)                       
  The  much  fuller  account  in  FR  (p. 386)  of the  elven-cloaks provided
 for  the  members  of  the  Company  (see  p.  272)  was added  in, probably
 not  much  later  (see  p.  343 and  note 35),  and the  words of  the Elves
 'There  is  no  magic  woven  in  these cloaks'  removed with  the introduc-
 tion  of Merry's  question (Pippin's  in FR)  'Are these  garments magical?'
 The leaf-brooches were a further and subsequent addition (see p. 398).     
  When  Haldir  reappeared  to  act  as  their   guide  from   Caras  Galadon
 (now without his brother  Orofin) he  said, just  as in  the draft  for this
 passage,  'There  are  strange  things  happening  away  back  there.  We do
 not  know  what  is  the  meaning  of  them' (see  pp. 279  - 80).  This was
 subsequently  struck  out  on  the  fair  copy, but  then marked  Stet; this
 was  in  turn  struck  out,  and  Haldir's  words  do  not  appear   in  the
 following text of the chapter or  in FR  (p. 387).  It is  very hard  to see
 why  my  father  removed  them,  and  why  he   hesitated  back   and  forth

  before  finally  doing so.  Apparently as  a comment  on this,  he pencilled
  a  note  on the  manuscript: 'This  won't do  - if  Lorien is  timeless, for
  then  nothing  will  have  happened   since  they   entered.'  I   can  only
  interpret  this  to  mean  that  within  Lorien  the  Company  existed  in a
  different  Time  -  with  its  mornings  and  evenings  and  passing  days -
  while  in  the  world  outside  Lorien no  time passed:  they had  left that
  'external' Time, and would  return to  it at  the same  moment as  they left
  it. This question is further discussed later (pp. 367 - 9). But it  does not
  seem   to   me   to   explain   why   only   Haldir's  opening   words  were
  removed.  His   announcement,  which   was  allowed   to  stand,   that  the
  Dimrill Dale was full  of smoke  and that  there were  noises in  the earth,
  merely  explains  what the  'strange things'  were which  the Elves  did not
  understand;  and  these  'strange  things'  had  obviously only  begun since
  the Company entered the Golden Wood.                                        
    As  in  the  draft  (p.  281)  the  words  of  Galadriel's  song   on  the
  swan-boat  are  not  reported,  but  my  father subsequently  put a  mark of
  insertion  on  the  manuscript,  with  the  word  'Song'.  On  the completed
  text  of  her  song  found  with the  draft papers  and given  on p.  284 he
  then  wrote  'Galadriel's  Song  for  XX.8',  this being  the number  of the
  page  in  the  present  manuscript.  Similarly there  is no  suggestion that
  Galadriel's  parting  song  ('in  some  ancient  tongue  of  the  West, from
  beyond  the  margin  of  the  world')  should  be  given,  though  'he heard
  not   the   words'  was   changed  on   the  manuscript   to  'he   did  not
  understand  the  words',  as  in FR;  but here  again my  father subsequent-
  ly pencilled a mark of insertion and the word 'Song' in the margin.         
    'They  saw  her  never  more'  of the  draft (p.  284) becomes  now 'Never
  again did Frodo see the Lady Galadriel',  where in  FR it  is said  'To that
  fair land Frodo never came again.'                                          
                                                                             
    The  following  outline  is  found on  a small,  isolated scrap  of paper.
  The only evidence of date that I  can see  is the  fact that  'Sam's casket'
  (i.e. his gift from Galadriel) is referred to, and it therefore followed the
  present  chapter. But  this seems  as good  a place  as any  to give  it, in
  relation to the end  of the  major outline  which I  have called  'The Story
  Foreseen from Moria' on p. 212.                                             
                                                                             
    The  Three  Rings  are  to  be freed,  not destroyed  by the  destruction of
    the  One.  Sauron  cannot  arise   again  in   person,  only   work  through
    men.  But  Lorien  is  saved,  and Rivendell,  and the  Havens -  until they
    grow  weary,  and  until  Men  (of  the  East)  'eat  up  the  world'.  Then
    Galadriel and Elrond will sail away. But Frodo saves the Rings.           
       Frodo saves the Shire; and Merry and Pippin become important.          
       Sackville-Bagginses are chucked out (become pot-boys at Bree).         
       Sam's casket restores Trees.                                           

   When old, Sam and Frodo set sail to island of West and [sic] Bilbo
 finishes the story. Out of gratitude the Elves  adopt them  and give
 them an island.                                                     
                                                                    
 At the head of  the page  is written:  'Saruman becomes  a wandering
 conjuror and trickster'.                                            

                               NOTES.                                       
                                                                           
  1. The  Stone  Hills  are  named  in  the  outlines  given  on pp.  233 and
     250.  The  last  word  in  the  illegible  phrase  preceding  'at  Stone
     Hills'  might  possibly  be  'drop', which  taken with  the note  in the
     outline  on  p.  233 that  the 'parting  of ways'  would take  place 'at
     Stonehills' might suggest that this was a first hint of the  great falls
     in Anduin.                                                             
  2. The word Carrock is  very indistinct;  it occurs  again in  outline (c),
     but  is  there  equally  so.  Yet  I  think  that this  is what  it must
     certainly be,  especially since  it seems  very suitable:  for Tolondren
     was  the  origin  of  Tol   Brandir,  and   thus  the   'Great  Carrock'
     would  answer  to   Beorn's  'Little   Carrock'  or   'Lesser  Carrock',
     itself  also rising  amid the  waters of  Anduin but  far to  the North;
     ondren  being  no  doubt  a   derivative  of   the  stem   GOND  'stone'
     (Etymologies, V.359).                                                  
  3. With  the  rejected  word  Duil cf.  Duil Rewinion,  name of  the Hills
     of  the  Hunters (west  of the  river Narog)  on the  first Silmarillion
     map,  IV.225.  -  Emyn  Rain  is  subsequently  spelt  Rhain  (see  note
     9);  cf.  the  Etymologies,  V.383,  stem  REG,  Noldorin  rhein,  rhain
     'border', also Minas rhain (Minas Tirith) p. 116.                      
  4. This  is  the  first  occurrence  of  the  Wetwang.  The second  word in
     the  Elvish  name  Palath  Nenui  is   slightly  uncertain,   but  seems
     probable.   Cf.   the   Etymologies,    V.380,   stem    PAL,   Noldorin
     palath   'surface';   also  palath   'iris',  VI.432,   VII.101.  Palath
     Nen(ui) occurs also on the First Map (see pp. 299, 308).               
  5. The  word  Naith  'Angle'  (see  the  Etymologies,  V.387,   stem  SNAS,
     Noldorin  naith  'gore')  seems  in the  context of  this outline  to be
     a   name  for   the  'green   spit'  or   'Tongue'  where   the  Company
     embarked  from   Lorien  on   their  journey   down  Anduin   (cf.  also
     Naith  Lorien  in  outline  (a));  and  subsequently  (p.  280)  this is
     expressly  stated:  'The  Naith  or  Angle  (as  the  elves  called this
     green sward)'.                                                         
        The name  Angle is  variously used.  In the  earliest mention  of the
     Lorien  story,   p.  207,   the  Company   'journey  to   Angle  between
     Anduin  and  Blackroot.  There   they  remain   long';  and   'at  Angle
     they  debate what  is to  be done.'  Since this  was written  before the
     actual  story  of  Lothlorien  had  been  begun,  the   precise  wording
     cannot  perhaps  be  pressed;  and  in  the original  text of  the first

      'Lothlorien'  chapter  the  meaning  seems  entirely  unambiguous.  As
      soon  as  they  had  crossed  the Blackroot  Hathaldir told  them that
      they  had  'entered  the Gore,  Nelen we  call it,  which lies  in the
      angle  between  Blackroot  and  Anduin'  (p. 231),  and he  told Gimli
      (ibid.)  that  in  the north  there were  'hidden defences  and guards
      across  the  open arms  of the  Angle between  the rivers'.  The other
      references  in  that  text  do not  contradict the  obvious conclusion
      from  these  two  passages,  that  whatever  the  extent of  the woods
      of  Lothlorien  may  have  been,  the  Angle  or Gore  (Bennas, Nelen,
      Nelennas) was  'the heart  of Lorien'  (see p.  243 note  46), Lorien-
      between-the-Rivers, the base of the  triangle being  the eaves  of the
      forest in the North.                                                  
         Thus 'Naith or Angle' in  this outline,  and again  in the  text of
      the present  chapter, referring  expressly to  the 'Tongue'  (the apex
      of the triangle),  represents either  a changed  meaning of  Angle, or
      else perhaps the use of  the English  word to  signify both  the large
      triangle  ('Lorien-between-the-Rivers')  and  the very  small triangle
      (the Tongue) that was the apex of the other.                          
         On  the other  hand, in  the fair  copy manuscript  of 'Lothlorien'
      the  distinction  is between  Narthas 'the  Gore', the  larger region,
      and  Nelen  'the  Angle',  the  region  in the  south where  the Elves
      dwelt (see  p. 236).  I doubt  that any  clearly correct  and consecu-
      tive formulation can be reached amid such fluidity.                   
         In FR (p. 361)  'the Naith  of Lorien,  or the  Gore' is  the large
      triangle, entered after  passage of  the Silverlode;  and in  the same
      passage  Haldir  speaks  of  the  dwellings  of  the  Elves   down  in
      Egladil,  in  the  Angle  between  the  waters.  Egladil  occurs once
      again  in  FR,  p.  389: There  in the  last end  of Egladil  upon the
      green  grass  the  parting  feast  was  held.'  Robert Foster,  in The
      Complete  Guide  to  Middle-earth,  defines  Naith  as  'That  part of
      Lorien   between   Celebrant   and   Anduin',   adding:   'The   Naith
      included Egladil but was of  greater extent';  and he  defines Egladil
      as  'The  heart  of  Lorien,  the  area  between Anduin  and Celebrant
      near their confluence. Called in Westron the Angle.'                  
  6.  Nelen  (with  changed  application)   and  Calennel   were  presumably
      other  possible  names,  beside Naith  (see note  5) and  Caletdil, of
      the  'green  spit'  or 'Tongue',  for which  in FR  no Elvish  name is
      given.                                                                
  7.  Green-tine:  translation  of  Calendil;  Old  English  tind  (cf.  the
      Tittdrock, Tol Brandir), later tine,  spike, prong,  tooth of  a fork;
      now  probably  known chiefly  of the  branches of  a deer's  horn. Cf.
      Silvertine, one of the Mountains of Moria (Celebdil).                 
  8.  Cf.  the  outline  on  p.  250:  the  Company  is  told to  'beware of
      Fangorn Forest upon the Ogodruth or Entwash'.                         
  9.  In the original text of the chapter the word  is clearly  spelt Rhain,
      while Rain is clear in outline (a). In this outline (c) it seems to be

      Rhein at the first occurrence,  with Rhain  written above,  but Rhan
      at the second and third; but the writing is very unclear and  I read
      Rhain here also.                                                   
  10. The showing of  the Mirror  now took  place on  the last  evening in
      Lothlorien: see p. 259. Very  probably the  fair copy  manuscript of
      'Galadriel' was now in existence.                                  
  11. Obviously written at the same time as the  rest of  the text  on the
      page is a disconnected passage that seems best placed here:        
         At  present  that  is  not  possible.  Westward  the  servants of
      Sauron  are  far  abroad  and  are  ... the  land ...  the Baranduin
      and  the  Greyflood.  Northward  there   are  strange   things  hap-
      pening   which  we   do  [not]   understand  clearly.   The  Dimrill
      [Dale]  is  filled  with  ash  and  smoke,  and  the  mountains  are
      troubled.  You,  Gimli  and  Legolas,  would  find  it hard  to make
      your way back even with a great company.                           
           'What of the Beornings?' said Gimli.                          
           'I do not know,' said Keleborn. 'They  are far  away. But  I do
      not think you could now reach them'                                
      The  illegible passage  could possibly  be read  (assuming rejection
      of the word  'are') as  'and have  taken over  the land  between the
      Baranduin  and  the Greyflood.'  See further  note 12.  - A  part of
      Keleborn's  speech  here  was afterwards  given to  Haldir, returned
      from  the  northern  borders  of  Lorien to  guide the  Company from
      Caras Galadon: pp. 280, 285 - 6.                                   
  12. With  this speech  of Keleborn's  compare that  in the  last chapter
      (pp. 248 - 9)  which was  marked for  transference to  the beginning
      of this. That passage was indeed quite  different, in  that Keleborn
      seemed  almost  to  assume  that  Gimli and  Legolas at  least would
      not continue the  Quest, and  offered them  both the  hospitality of
      Lorien, while  also advising  Gimli that  he might  be able  to make
      his  way  back  through  the  land  of  the  Beornings.  Now  (quite
      closely approaching the text of FR, p. 383) he offers  a generalised
      invitation  to  remain  to  any of  the Company  who wish.  But from
      what can be read of the underlying  pencilled text  it is  seen that
      my  father  at  first  retained  the  passage  transferred  from the
      previous  chapter  in  much  the  same  form.  The passage  given in
      note  11  shows  a  change of  mind: Gimli  and Legolas  would stand
      little chance if they tried to return.                             
  13. The form Ondor (as written ab  initio) occurs  in the  fifth version
      of 'The Council of Elrond' (p. 144 and note 6).                    
  14. In  a  rejected  form  of  this passage  Keleborn takes  up Ingold's
      remark  that  he  doubted  whether  even Gandalf  had had  any clear
      plan:                                                              
           'Maybe,'  said Keleborn.  'Yet he  knew that  he would  have to
      choose  between  East  and  West  ere  long.  For  the  Great  River
      lies  between  Mordor  and  Minas  Tirith,  and he  knew, as  do you

      Men at least of this  Company, that  it cannot  be crossed  on foot,
      and  that  the  bridges  of  Osgiliath  are  broken  down or  in the
      hands of the Enemy since the late assault.'                         
                                                                         
  15. On 'the Land of Seven Streams' see p. 177 and pp. 310-12.           
  16. Here  and  again  below  ('Ingold   thanked  Keleborn   many  times')
      Ingold  was  not  changed  to  Elfstone   because  the   passage  was
      rejected  before  my  father  decided  to  abandon  the  name  Ingold
      (see pp. 277 - 8).                                                  
  17. This is the first mention of the great falls in Anduin (apart  from a
      very doubtful hint of their existence referred to in note 1).       
  18. As the text was  written Sam's  attitude to  the boats  was different
      from  what it  had been  in the  previous version  (where he  felt 'a
      little alarm') and from what it is in FR:                           
      Even Sam felt no  alarm. Not  long ago  crossing a  river by  a ferry
      had  seemed  to  him  an  adventure,  but  since  then  he  had  made
      too   many   weary    marches   and    passed   through    too   many
      dangers  to  worry  about a  journey in  a light  boat and  the peril
      of drowning.                                                        
      This was subsequently changed to the passage in FR.                 
  19. The  name  of  the  Sword  of Elendil  reforged, Branding,  was first
      devised here,  and then  written into  'The Ring  Goes South'  at the
      time  of  the reforging  in Rivendell:  'and Elfstone  gave it  a new
      name  and  called  it Branding'  (p. 165).  Branding is  obviously an
      'English'  name  (Old  English  brand  'sword'),  and  consorts  with
      the names Ingold,  Elfstone: see  my father's  notes on  this subject
      cited on p. 277.                                                    
  20. The drawing,  in pencil,  is now  very faint.  I have  reinforced the
      drawing on a photocopy, and the reproduction is based on this.      
  21. In the  original account  of the  first meeting  of the  Company with
      the  Lord  and  Lady  of  the  Galadrim   (pp.  246   ff.)  Galadriel
      addresses no  words to  Gimli. These  first appear  in the  fair copy
      manuscript of  'Galadriel', where  she says  just as  in FR  (p. 371)
      'Dark  is  the water  of Kheled-zaram,  and cold  are the  springs of
      Kibil-nala...': a further indication  that that  text was  already in
      existence.                                                          
  22. Although Earendil  appears in  the fair  copy manuscript  of 'Galad-
      riel' (p. 266 note 34), Earendel is  the spelling  here, both  in the
      draft and in the fair copy. In my  copies of  these chapters  made in
      1942  I  wrote  Earendil  in  Chapter  XIX  and Earendel  in Chapter
      XX.                                                                 
  23. The  meaning  of  Galadriel's  words  to  Trotter  is   plainly  that
      Elfstone was his real name. The fact  that the  final version  of the
      passage begins ' "Here is the gift of Keleborn to the leader  of your
      Company,"  she  said  to  Elfstone'  -  before  the  green  gem,  the
      Elfstone, has been mentioned - is decisive.                         
  24. This change has often been remarked  in earlier  parts of  this book.

            
                                                                        
 The  first  examples  of  Aragorn  >  Elfstone  are p.  80 note  17 (at
 Bree)  and  pp.  146  ff.  (the  fifth  version  of  'The   Council  of
 Elrond').  It was  carried through  the fair  copy manuscripts  of 'The
 Ring  Goes  South'  (p.  165;  including  Trotter  > Elfstone),  and of
 the  two  'Moria'  chapters  (pp.  176,  204,  the  change  here  being
 always Trotter > Elfstone).                                             
 25 With  the statement  in both  these notes  that Trotter's  real name
 must  not  be  'Elvish'  or  'Gnome-elvish'  ('like  Aragorn') contrast
 LR  Appendix  F  ('Of  Men'):  'The  Dunedain  alone  of  all  races of
 Men  knew  and  spoke  an  Elvish  tongue;  for  their  forefathers had
 learned  the  Sindarin  tongue,  and  this  they  handed  on  to  their
 children as a matter of lore, changing little with  the passing  of the
 years',  together  with  the  footnote  to this  passage: 'Most  of the
 names  of  the  other  men  and  women  of  the  Dunedain  [i.e.  those
 whose   names   were   not   Quenya],   such   as   Aragorn,  Denethor,
 Gilraen are of Sindarin form...'                                        
 26 In the first draft following this outline  it is  said of  Gimli and
 Legolas  that   they  'had   grown  more   and  more   friendly  during
 their stay in  Lothlorien'; in  the following  version (vii)  that they
 'had grown  strangely friendly  of late'.  In FR  they 'had  now become
 fast friends'.  - The  complement of  each boat  is now  as in  FR, and
 not  as  in  outline  (b)  to  this  chapter  (p. 268),  although there
 already  Legolas  and  Gimli were  placed together  in the  third boat.
  27 In the fair copy manuscript of 'Farewell to Lorien' the text here
 IS:                                                                     
    On  the  further  shores  the  woodlands  still  marched  on  south-
    wards,  as  far  as  eye  could  see;  but  beyond  the  Tongue  and
    upon  the  east  side  of  the River  all the  boughs were  bare. No
    mallorn-trees grew there.                                            
 The  intended  meaning  seems  clear:  on  the  west  bank  beyond  the
 confluence  of  Silverlode  and  Anduin,  and all  along the  east bank
 of Anduin, there was  still forest,  but the  trees not  being mallorns
 they  were  leafless.  So  Keleborn  says  that  as  they  go  down the
 River they will find that 'the trees will fail', and they will  come to
 a  barren  country.  In   the  following   manuscript,  which   I  made
 (undated,  but  clearly  following  on  my  copy  of  'Galadriel' dated
 4  August  1942,  p.  261),  the  sentence  reads  'all the  banks were
 bare'. This, I think, must have  been a  mere error  (as also  was 'the
 eye  could  see'  for  'eye  could  see',  retained  in FR),  since (in
 relation  to  'the  woodlands  still  marched  on  southwards')  it  is
 obviously   a   less   well-chosen   and   somewhat   ambiguous   word:
 'bare banks' suggests treeless banks, not wooded banks in winter.       
    Probably  in  order  to  correct  this,  but without  consulting the
 earlier  manuscript  and  so  not  seeing  that  it  was  an  error, my
 father  at  some  stage  changed 'further  shores' to  'further western
 shores'  on  my  copy,  but this  still gives  a confused  picture. The

       text  in  FR  (p.  387)  removes  the  reference to  the west  shores of
       Anduin   altogether,   but   retains  the   'bare  banks',   which  must
       therefore be interpreted as 'wooded banks in winter'.                  
  28.  In the earliest draft for the  scene in  the first  'Lothlorien' chapter
       in  which  the  Company  encounters  the  Elvish  scouts near  the falls
       of  Nimrodel  (p.  239 note  26) the  lowest boughs  of the  trees 'were
       above  the  reach  of  Boromir's  arms;  but  they  had rope  with them.
       Casting  an  end  about a  bough of  the greatest  of the  trees Legolas
       ... climbed into the darkness.'                                        
  29.  There  is  no  more  than  the  briefest  outline sketch  of Galadriel's
       'refusal  in  the  garden'  in  the  original  'Lothlorien'  chapter (p.
       254), whereas in the fair copy the scene is fully formed (p. 260).     
  30.  This  reference  to  the  once  far  greater  extent  of  the  Forest of
       Lothlorien  is  not  found  in  FR   (see  note   34).  Perhaps   to  be
       compared  is   Unfinished  Tales,   p.  236:   the  Nandorin   realm  of
       Lorinand  [Lorien]  ...  was   peopled  by   those  Elves   who  forsook
       the  Great  Journey  of  the  Eldar  from Cuivienen  and settled  in the
       woods  of  the  Vale  of  Anduin; and  it extended  into the  forests on
       both   sides   of   the   Great  River,   including  the   region  where
       afterwards was Dol Guldur.'                                            
  31.  Ingold here can only have been a slip for Elfstone.                    
  32.  The  Seventh  River  has  been mentioned  in the  fifth version  of 'The
       Council of Elrond', p. 149. See pp. 310 - 12.                          
  33.  Tharbad  has  been  named  in  the  second  version  of  'The  Ring Goes
       South', p. 164 and note 8.                                             
  34.  These  passages   were  actually   written  when   the  fair   copy  had
       reached  this  point.  In  the  fair  copy  a page  ends with  the words
       'you will find  that for  a while  the trees  march on.  For of  old the
       Forest  of  Lorien'.  It  was  at this  point that  my father  wrote the
       first  of  these  passages,  which  was  in  fact  simply  the   top  of
       the  next  page  of  the  fair  copy.  Deciding however  to cut  out the
       reference  to  the  once much  greater extent  of Lothlorien,  he struck
       out  these  words  at  the  bottom  of  the preceding  page in  the fair
       copy, and wrote the second draft given here.                           
  35.  In  the  original  workings  the  fourth  line  was And  by the  mere of
       Tirion there  grew the  golden tree.  Another version  of the fifth line
       was  Beneath  the  Hill  of  Ilmarin lies  Aelinuial -  Aelinuial 'Lakes
       of  Twilight'  being  the  name  of  the  region of  great pools  at the
       confluence  of  the  rivers  Aros  and  Sirion  in  Beleriand;  cf.  the
       Shadow-meres  in  the  seventh  line.  In  Bilbo's  song   at  Rivendell
       occur the lines                                                        
                                                                             
                         beneath the hill o f Ilmarin                         
                         where glimmer in a valley sheer                     
                         the lights of Elven Tirion                           
                         the city on the Shadowmere                           
       and also From Evereven's lofty hills (see pp. 93, 98; FR pp. 247 - 8).

                  
                                                                          
 36. Boromir's words 'I have not myself been there' (referring to
    Fangorn), p.  282, were  changed to  'I have  not myself  ever crossed
    Rohan.'                                                                
                                                                          
                    Additional Notes on the name Elfstone.                 
                                                                          
 A  puzzling detail  in the  fair copy  manuscript of  this chapter  is that
 while  Trotter  is  referred to  as Trotter  throughout the  narrative (see
 pp.  277 -  8), on  the two  occasions where  he is  named by  Keleborn the
 name  is  Ingold.  According  to  the  explanation  advanced  on  pp. 277-8
 he  should now,  if called  by his  true name,  be Elfstone.  Moreover when
 we come to the scene of the  Parting Gifts  in this  manuscript Galadriel's
 words  to  Trotter  remain  exactly  as  in  the  draft  text  on   p.  276
 ('Elfstone is your name ... and it is a fair name. I will add this  gift of
 my own to match it'). How then can Keleborn call him Ingold?              
  The answer, I feel sure, is (as I have  suggested, p.  267) that  the fair
 copy manuscript  itself grew  in close  relation to  the drafts,  where the
 names  were  not  stable; and  that it  was not  carefully revised  in this
 point. In the first case, near the beginning of the  chapter, where  in the
 draft  text  Keleborn  names 'Boromir  of Ondor  and Ingold  the traveller'
 among   those   of   the   Company   accustomed   to   boats,   Ingold  was
 changed subsequently to Elfstone  (p. 273),  but in  the fair  copy 'Ingold
 the  traveller'  remained  unchanged.  In  the  second  case  also, towards
 the end of the chapter, where in the draft  Keleborn says  'it may  be that
 Ingold  and  Boromir  know  the  lands well  enough to  need no  counsel' -
 which  can  only  have been  a casual  inadvertence, note  31 -  Ingold was
 corrected to Elfstone in the draft but not in the fair copy.              
  Later,  my  father  corrected  the  second  Ingold  on  the  fair  copy to
 Aragorn but  did not  notice the  first. Without  knowledge of  the earlier
 texts   this   hasty  and   incomplete  revision   of  names   can  produce
 incomprehensible  tangles  later  on,  when   amanuenses  such   as  myself
 simply followed what they  saw before  them: so  in the  next text  of this
 chapter, a manuscript that I made (note 27),  I wrote  Ingold at  the first
 occurrence and Aragorn at the second.                                     
                                                                          
  Galadriel's  words  at  the  gift-giving, Elfstone  is your  name, Eldamir
 in the language of your fathers of old, and it is a fair name,  were struck
 out on the fair copy, with the curious result that  in the  manuscript that
 I  wrote  in  1942  Galadriel  says:  'The  blade that  is drawn  from this
 sheath shall not be stained or broken even in defeat. I will add  this gift
 of  my  own  to  match  it.' Later  on, my  father wrote  on his  fair copy
 manuscript (but not on the  one that  I made),  against the  description of
 Galadriel's gift and  her words  concerning it  (retained exactly  from the
 draft  on  p.  276):  Make  this  the  reason  for  his  taking   the  name
 Elfstone;  and  after  the  words   'yet  many   things  that   now  appear
 loathly  will  appear  otherwise  to  you  hereafter'  he  wrote  in:  'And

 [Eldamir >] Elessar shall be a name for you hereafter,  Elfstone in
 [the  tongues  of  common  speech >]  your speech.  Long may  it be
 remembered.'                                                      

                                     XV.                                  
                               THE FIRST MAP                             
                          OF THE LORD OF THE RINGS.                       
                                                                         
 Of  the  various  small-scale  maps  of  the  western  regions  of Middle-
 earth that my father made, one  is very  easily seen  to be  the earliest;
 and I have no doubt at  all that  this was  not only  the earliest  of the
 maps that are extant, but was in fact the  first one  that he  made (other
 than the hasty sketches of particular regions published in Vol. VI).     
  This  'First  Map'  is  a   strange,  battered,   fascinating,  extremely
 complicated  and  highly  characteristic  document.  To  gain  understand-
 ing of it,  its construction  must first  be described.  It consists  of a
 number  of  pages  glued  together  and  on  to  backing  sheets,  with  a
 substantial  new  section  of  the  map  glued over  an earlier  part, and
 small new sections on top of that. The glue that my  father used  to stick
 down  the  large  new  portion  was  strong,  and  the  sheets  cannot  be
 separated;  moreover  through  constant  folding  the  paper  has  cracked
 and  broken  apart along  the folds,  which are  distinct from  the actual
 joins  of the  map-sections. It  was thus  difficult to  work out  how the
 whole  was  built  up;  but I am  confident that  the following  account is
 correct.  In  this  account  I refer  to the  figure 'Construction  of the
 Original  Map of  The Lord  of the  Rings' on  p. 297.  This is  a diagram
 and not a map, but I have inserted  a few  major features  (the sea-coast,
 Anduin,  Mirkwood,  the  rough  outlines  of  the mountainous  regions) as
 a guide.                                                                 
  The  original  element  in  the   map  consisted   of  two   pages  glued
 together along their vertical edges, and  is the  big rectangle  framed in
 the figure by a black and white line and lettered A. East of  the vertical
 line of squares numbered 22  it extended  for a  further three  lines, but
 these were left blank.                                                   
  A  new  section  (made  up  of  three  portions glued  together) extended
 the  original  map  to North  and West.  (I say  'new section',  since the
 paper  is  slightly  different,  and it  was obviously  added to  what was
 already  in  existence.)  This  section  is  marked  B  on the  figure and
 framed in double lines. It extends north of  what is  shown on  the figure
 by five more horizontal lines of squares (A-E, I - 17).                  
  As  already  mentioned,  a  third  section,  marked C  on the  figure and
 framed in double  lines (squares  o-w, 9-19), was  superimposed on  a part
 of the original map  'A', obliterating  almost all  of its  southern half.

                                          
                                                                           
 This  new  section  'C'  extends  further  south  than  did  'A',  by  three
 horizontal lines of squares (U-W, 9 - 19). Fortunately, a good part  of this
 section  has no  backing paper,  and by  shining a  bright light  through it
 it  has  been  possible  to   make  out   certain  names   and  geographical
 features  on  the  'lost', southern  half of  'A'. This  is a  difficult and
 confusing  operation,  and  the results  are very  incomplete, but  they are
 quite sufficient to show the essentials of what lies  beneath 'C'.  All that
 I  can  make  out  after  long  peering  is  shown on  the map  numbered III (A)
 (p. 308).                                                                  
    The  small rectangle  lettered D  on the  figure and  framed in  dots was
 replaced  over  and  over  again, and  is by  far the  most complex  part of
 the  map,  as the  region covered  is also  crucial in  the story:  from the
 Gap of Rohan and Isengard to Rauros and the mouths of Entwash.             
                                                                           
                    The original element in the First Map                   
                                                                           
    The  First  Map  was  my  father's  working  map  for  a good  while, and
 thus as it stood when  he left  it -  as it  stands now  - it  represents an
 evolution,  rather than  a fixed  state of  the geography.  Determination of
 the  sequence  in  which  the  map  was  built  up  does  not,   of  course,
 demonstrate  that  names  or features  on 'A'  are necessarily  earlier than
 names  or  features  on  'B' or  'C', since  when 'A'  + 'B'  + 'C'  were in
 being the map  was a  single entity.  There are,  however, certain  clues to
 relative  dating.  The  earliest  layer  of names  is recognisable  from the
 style of lettering, and also to  some extent  from the  fact that  my father
 at  that  stage  used  red ink  for certain  names, chiefly  in the  case of
 alternatives  (as for  example Loudtwater  in black  ink, Bruinen  beside it
 in red). On the  directly visible  part of  'A', virtually  all of  which is
 shown  on  Map  II  (p.  305),  all  the  names  are  'original'   with  the
 exception  of   the  following:   Torfirion  (Westermanton);   North  Downs,
 Fornobel    (Northbury);    Forodwaith   (Northerland);    Enedwaith   (Mid-
 dlemarch);   Caradras;   Nimrodel,    Silverlode;   Mirkwood    the   Great,
 Southern   Mirkwood,   Rhovanion;   Rhosgobel,    Dol   Dughul    (but   Dol
 Dugol in red ink, struck out, on M 15 -  16 is  original); Bardings;  Sea of
 Rhunaer  and  Rhun. Notable  is the  case of  Silverlode: here  the original
 name  was  Redway,  struck   out  and   changed  in   the  same   script  to
 Blackroot,  and  this  change  is  very precisely  documented in  the second
 version of 'The Ring Goes South', p. 166.                                  
    In this  'original layer'  of names  are a  few others  which I  have not
 included  in  the redrawn  map (II)  since I  could not  find room  for them
 without  unnecessarily confusing  it, the  scale being  so small:  these are
 Chetwood,   Midgewater,   Forest   River,   Woodmen,   Wood   Elves,  Dale.
 F.I.  (so  written in  the original)  on the  Road east  of Bree  stands for
 Forsaken  Inn.  On  the   River  Rushdown   (Rhimdad)  cf.   V.384,  VI.205,
 where the form is Rhimdath (also Rhibdath).                                
    Three  of  the  original  names  were  changed,  and  I have  entered the

                               
                                                                           
  later  form.  These are  the river  Isen, first  written Iren  on P  8 (Old
  English,  'iron',  which  varied  with  Isen);  Andrath on  L 8,  where the
  original form is unclear since a broken fold  of the  map runs  through it,
  but  seems  to  have  been  Amrath  (as  in a  draft for  a portion  of the
  chapter  'Many  Meetings',  see  pp.  69  -  70  and  note  7);  and Anduin
  (M-N 13, Maps II and IV ), first written Andon (see p. 299).              
     Of geographical features, most of  what is  represented on  the directly
  visible  part  of  'A'  goes  back  to  the  beginning,  and  of  course  a
  substantial  part  of  that  was  derived  from  the  Map of  Wilderland in
  The  Hobbit.  Elements that  are not  'original' are  the highlands  in the
  North-west of Map II (I 8-9, J 7 - 8); the  markings representing  the Iron
  Hills  (though  the  name  itself  is  original); the  Sea of  Rhunaer, the
  mountainous  region  to the  South-west of  it, the  river flowing  into it
  from  the  Iron  Hills,  and  the  lower  course  of  the  (unnamed)  River
  Running,  which  as  the  map  was  first  made  scarcely  extended  beyond
  the eastern edge of the Wilderland Map in The Hobbit.                     
     Some  other  geographical  features  are  slightly  doubtful,   but  the
  western  arm  of   the  Misty   Mountains  across   squares  I   10-11  was
  probably  a  subsequent  addition,   and  the   vast  region   of  highland
  between  Mirkwood  and  the  Sea  of  Rhunaer,  together  with  the streams
  flowing from it  into the  Dead Marshes  (N 16),  almost certainly  so. The
  original siting  of the  name Dol  Dugol (M  15; see  p. 296)  probably had
  nothing to do with these  highlands (at  the first  occurrence of  the name
  on p. 178 Gandalf speaks  of Sauron's  'older and  lesser dwelling  at Dol-
  Dugol  in  Southern  Mirkwood'): faint  traces of  green colour  suggest to
  me  that  originally  Mirkwood   extended  much   further  to   the  South-
  east, covering L 15 and a good part of M-N 15  - 16,  and that  this region
  of the forest was erased. The hills  that emerge  onto N  15 from  the area
  which I have left blank on  Map II  are also  additional: this  region will
  be discussed later in this chapter.                                       
     The river Isen is a bit doubtful,  since though  the name  as originally
  written (R.  Iren, see  above) clearly  belongs with  the primary  layer of
  names,   the   coastline  as   drawn  had   no  river-mouth   opposite  the
  off-shore  island  on   P  7,   and  a   pencilled  indentation   was  made
  subsequently.  The  same  is   true  of   the  unnamed   river  (afterwards
  Lefnui)  to  the  south  of  Isen, whose  mouth was  drawn in  on R  8 (Map
  III).                                                                     
     On the part of the original map 'A' that is obliterated by  the sticking
  on  of  portion  'C'  some  names  and  features  can  be seen,  as already
  described (p. 296., Map III (A)). It is  clear that  at that  stage relatively
  little was entered on  the map.  Those in  black ink  can be  readily seen,
  and  I  do  not  think  that  there   were  any   others  beyond   Land  of
  Mor-dor,  Minas Morgol  (with Ithil  in red  ink), Osgiliath,  Minas Tirith
  (with Anor in red  ink), Blackroot  > Silverlode  (see under  Map II  on p.
  306),  Tolfalas,  Bay of  Belfalas, and  Ethir-andon (as  it seems  to have
  been written,  before being  changed to  -anduin, as  on the  northern part

 of  'A').  Dead Marshes  is in  red ink;  other names  seem to  have been
 entered in red chalk (Land of Ond) or pencil. The  actual sites  of Minas
 Morgol  and  the  Dark  Tower  cannot  be  seen,  nor  can  the  last two
 letters of  Palath Nen[ui]  (on which  see p.  268 and  note 4);  and the
 mountain-chains  are  extremely  hard  to  make  out.  The  bits  of  the
 mountains  of  Mordor  in  the  North-west  that  I  have  been  able  to
 distinguish with certainty suggest however a disposition  essentially the
 same as that in 'C'. The  occurrence of  Dol [?Amroth]  at this  stage is
 notable.                                                                
                                                                        
   It is thus clear that, whenever the  First Map  was actually  begun, it
 had reached the stage seen in the original 'layer' of portion  'A' before
 the time we have now reached in  the texts,  and also  that much  of that
 layer belongs to this period of the  work: many  of these  original names
 on the map emerge first in the  texts given  in this  book -  for example
 Sarn Ford (p. 9), Entish  Land (p.  10), Mitheithel  (p. 14),  Bruinen (p.
 14), Minas  Tirith (p.  115), Minas  Morgol (p.  116), Minas  Anor, Minas
 Ithil (p. 119), Bay of Belfalas (p.  119), Tharbad  (p. 164),  etc. Andon
 (Ethir-andon)  was  a  form  preceding  Anduin  which  never  occurred in
 the  texts:  Anduin  appears  in  the  fifth version  of 'The  Council of
 Elrond' where the name Sirvinya 'New  Sirion' appears  in the  third (pp.
 119, 144).                                                              
                                                                        
                               The 1943 Map.                             
                                                                        
   In 1943 (see Letters nos. 74 and 98) I  made a  large elaborate  map in
 pencil  and  coloured chalks,  companion to  a similar  one of  the Shire
 (see VI.107, 200). It was the First Map that I had in front of me  when I
 made it. My map is thus  of historical  value in  showing what  the state
 of the First Map was at that time - especially in  respect of  names, for
 though I was as faithful to the courses of  rivers and  coasts as  I have
 attempted to be 45 years later, I used pictorial forms for  the mountains
 and hills, which are less precise.(1)                                   
                                                                        
                       The redrawn maps in this book.                    
                                                                        
   In Unfinished Tales I referred (pp.  13 -  14) to  my father's  maps of
 The  Lord  of  the  Rings as  'sketch-maps'; but  this was  an ill-chosen
 word, and in respect of the First Map  a serious  misnomer. All  parts of
 the First Map were made with great care and delicacy  until a  late stage
 of correction, and it has an  exceedingly 'Elvish'  and archaic  air. The
 difficulties of interpretation  do not  arise from  any roughness  in the
 original  execution,  but  in  part  from  subsequent alteration  in very
 small space,  and in  part from  its present  condition: it  is wrinkled,
 creased,  and broken  from constant  use, so  that connections  are lost,

  and  many  names  and  markings  added  in  pencil   are  so   blurred  and
  faint as to  be almost  invisible. My  father made  a good  deal of  use of
  pencil  and  coloured chalks:  mountain-chains are  shaded in  grey, rivers
  (for  the  most  part)  represented  in  blue  chalk,  marshland  and wood-
  land  in  shades  of  green (Mirkwood  is conveyed  by little  curved marks
  in  green  chalk,  suggestive of  treetops); and  this colouring  is rubbed
  and faded (it is often very difficult to be sure of the courses of rivers).
  In  regions  where  the  development  of   the  story   caused  substantial
  alteration  in  the  geography,  notably  where  the  hills  and  mountains
  were  much  changed  and  overlaid  by  new  representations, there  are so
  many  lines and  strokes and  dots that  it is  impossible to  feel certain
  what  my  father  intended,  or  even  to  make  out what  there is  on the
  paper.(2)                                                                  
    Inevitably,  the   attempt  to   redraw  the   map  involves   more  than
  merely  copying  (and  since  it must  be represented  in black  and white,
  different  symbolisation,  notably   of  wooded   regions,  must   to  some
  extent be used, or else dispensed with);  to redraw  is in  such a  case to
  interpret.  My  redrawings  are  therefore  to  an  extent   simpler,  less
  subtle,  and  more decisive  in detail,  than the  original, and  of course
  uniform  in  appearance,  since they  have all  been made  at one  time and
  with  the  same  pens.  These  maps  are  therefore  quite  insufficient in
  themselves as  a substitute  for the  original, and  the discussion  of the
  redrawn  maps  is  an  integral  part  of  my   attempt  to   present  this
  remarkable document.                                                       
    The  major  question  to  resolve,  however,  arose  from  the  fact that
  this  map  was  a  continuous  development,  evolving  in  terms   of,  and
  reacting  upon,  the  narrative  it  accompanied. To  redraw it  involved a
  decision  on  what  to  include  and  what  to exclude.  But to  attempt to
  limit  its content  to the  names and  features that  might be  supposed to
  have been present at a particular time  (in terms  of the  narrative) would
  involve  a  host  of complexities  and dubious  or arbitrary  decisions. It
  was  clearly  far  better to  represent the  map in  a developed  form; and
  except in the  case of Map III (A) (where a  large part  of the  original map
  'A'  was  early  abandoned)  and  of  maps IV (A-E) (where  there   are  six
  successive  and  distinct  versions)  I  have therefore  taken my  1943 map
  as  a  conveniently  fixed  and  definite  terminus,  though not  without a
  number  of  exceptions.  It is  to be  understood throughout  the following
  discussion  that   everything  on   my  redrawn   versions  in   this  book
  appears  in  that form  on the  1943 map  unless something  is said  to the
  contrary.  Many  of the  subsequent alterations  made to  the First  Map or
  to the 1943 map or to both are however mentioned.                          
    The  map-squares  of  the  original  are  of  2  centimetre  side  (on my
  1943  map  the  squares  were  enlarged  to  4  centimetres).  No  scale is
  given; but a later  and much  rougher map,  also ruled  in squares  of this
  size, gives 2 centimetres = 100 miles, and  this was  clearly the  scale of
  the First Map also.                                                        

                                Maps I and I (A).                          
                                                                          
   Map  I,  with  the  extreme North  and North-east  on I,  gives virtually
 the whole of the added  portion 'B'  (see the figure on  p. 297):  thus 'B'
 extends from A to H, 1-17, and from I to  Q, 1-6  and a  portion of  7. The
 section marked off on the right-hand side of  Map I  is the  left-hand side
 of the original portion 'A', and this is duplicated on Map II.            
   This  portion  'B'  received  no  emendation  whatsoever after  its first
 drawing  except  in  one  minor  point.  The  great  highlands  (afterwards
 called  the  Hills  of  Evendim)  between  the  river  Lune  and  the North
 Downs  certainly  belong  with  the  rest  of 'B',  and were  extended into
 square  J  7  of  'A',  already  in  existence;  and  the North  Downs were
 entered on 'A' at the same time (for the place-names see under Map II).
   This is the only  map that  shows the  far northern  coast, and  the vast
 bay  shaped  like a  human head  and face  (E-G 7-9, on map I (A)).  In view
 of  Appendix  A  (I.  iii)  to  The  Lord of  the Rings,  where there  is a
 reference to 'the great cape of Forochel that shuts  off to  the north-west
 the immense bay of that name', it is clear that this bay is 'the  Icebay of
 Forochel'  (see  Unfinished  Tales  p.  13  and footnote)  - although  on a
 subsequent  map  of  my  father's  the  much smaller  southern bay  (H 6-7)
 is very clearly labelled and limited 'the Icebay of Forochel', as it  is on
 my  map  published  with The  Lord of  the Rings (3). No  names are  given in
 this  region  on the  First Map,  but subsequently  my father  pencilled in
 North  Sea  across  G  4-5,  and  this  I  entered on  my 1943  map, though
 inadvertently omitted on Map I.                                           
   On  the  islands  of  Tol  Fuin  and  Himling  see  p.  124 and  note 18.
 - The 'sea-lines' are not present in the original, but  they are  marked on
 parts  'A'  and  'C' and  I have  therefore extended  them throughout.  - I
 cannot explain the wavy  line that  extends roughly  parallel to  the coast
 from H 4 to K 3 .(4)                                                      
   It will  be seen  on Map  I that  the distinction  between the  North and
 South   Havens   (here   Forlorn   and   Harlorn  for  later   Forlond  and
 Harlond), situated in  bays of  the Gulf  of Lune,  and Mithlond,  the Grey
 Havens, at the head of the gulf, was already present (but see p. 423).
   With  this  first  representation of  Ered Luin,  the Blue  Mountains, in
 the context of The Lord of the Rings  cf. the  revision of  the end  of The
 Fall of Numenor cited on pp. 122  - 3.  Very notable  is the  appearance of
 Belegost  (L  5),  which  is  marked  on  the  1943  map  also,  but  on no
 subsequent  one.  The  Dwarf-cities   of  the   Blue  Mountains   were  not
 originally  marked  on  the  second  Silmarillion  map  (V.409,  411),  but
 were put in roughly later: Belegost being situated on  the eastern  side of
 the   mountains  somewhat   north  of   Mount  Dolmed   and  the   pass  by
 which the Dwarf-road crossed them. Cf. Unfinished Tales p. 235:           
                                                                          
   There were and always remained some Dwarves on the eastern side         
   of Ered Lindon, where the very ancient  mansions of  Nogrod and         

 Belegost  had  been  -  not  far  from Nenuial;  but they  had transferred
 most of their strength to Khazad-dum.                                     
                                                                          
 The  White  Towers  on  the  Tower  Hills  are  represented by  three dots
 in a line (K 6). - The letter F on square M 7 of Map I and the letters ITH
 on  square  H  11  of Map I (A) belong  to Forodwaith,  on which  see under
 Map II.                                                                   
                                                                          
                                   Map II.                                 
                                                                          
 This  redrawing,  as  will  be  seen  by  comparison  with the  diagram on
 p. 297, covers almost all the still directly visible part of 'A', the only
 areas not included being the almost blank squares I -  T 20  eastwards and
 Q-T 7 - 8 in the  South-west, which  is mostly  sea (and  is shown  on Map
 III). It also  covers the  two top  lines of  squares of  the superimposed
 portion 'C (0-P 9 - 19), and the rectangle 'D', which  is here  left blank
 apart  from  the  continuation  of  certain  names.  On  the  left  Map II
 overlaps with Map I and at the bottom with Map III.                       
 I  have  noted  under  Map  I  that  the  eastern  end  of  the  highlands
 afterwards  called  the  Hills  of  Evendim  and  the  North   Downs  were
 extended onto portion 'A' (I 8 - 9, J 7-8) when 'B'  was added.  The names
 Torfirion  (changed  from   Tarkilmar)  or   Westermanton  occur   in  the
 fifth version of 'The  Council of  Elrond', p.  144; on  the First  Map my
 father  afterwards  scribbled  Annuminas  here,  but  Torfirion  (Wester-
 manton)  appears  on  my  1943  map.  The  name  originally  written  here
 on  the  First  Map  was in  fact Fornobel,  but this  seems to  have been
 changed   at   once,   and  Fornobel   (Northbury)  written   against  the
 habitation  on  the   North  Downs.   The  earlier   name  for   this  was
 Osforod,  the  Northburg  (pp.  120  -  1, 129),  but Fornobel  appears by
 emendation  in  the fifth  version of  'The Council  of Elrond'  (p. 147).
 Here  my father  scribbled in  the later  name Fornost,  but the  1943 map
 still has Fornobel (Northbury).                                           
 Most  of  the  names  and  features  on  the  'A'  part  of  Map   II  are
 original,  and  have  been  commented   on  already   (p.  296).   On  the
 significance of Greyflood or Seventh River see  pp. 310  - 12.  Gwathlo is
 certainly an original name, though it has not appeared in any text.       
 The  various  additions  made  to  'A'  (listed  on p.  296) were  made in
 the  same  spidery  lettering and  very fine  lines characteristic  of the
 superimposed   section   'C'.   The   name  Enedwaith   (Middlemarch)  was
 written  across  'A'  and  'C'  after 'C'  had been  stuck on,  and Forod-
 (waith)  (Northerland)  belongs  with  it  (though  -waith  was  a further
 and  rougher  addition).  Enedwaith  here  denotes  a much  greater region
 than  it afterwards  became (the  lands between  Greyflood and  Isen): the
 original conception, it is  seen, was  of a  great 'triad',  Forodwaith or
 Northerland,  bounded  on  the  South-east  by  the  Greyflood,  Enedwaith
 or   Middlemarch  between   Greyflood  and   Anduin,  and   Haradwaith  or

 Sutherland  (on  Map III)  bounded on  the North-west  by Anduin  (or by
 the  river Harnen).  All this  remains on  the 1943  map, but  my father
 wrote on that map against Forodwaith: (or Eriador).                    
   On  the  changed  names  Iren  >  Isen,  Amrath  (?)  >  Andrath  (not
 entered at all on the 1943 map), and Andon > Anduin, see p. 298.       
   I  have  mentioned  (p.  298)  that the  great highland  between Mirk-
 wood  and  the  Sea  of  Rhunaer  was almost  certainly not  an original
 element  of 'A',  and the  streams flowing  down from  it into  the Dead
 Marshes (N  16) were  continued with  the same  pen-strokes onto  'C' (0
 16), which had already been added. (Of this highland region there  is no
 trace  on  my  1943  map:  all  this area  is a  pure blank,  though the
 streams  on  N  16  are shown.)  Within the  outline of  these highlands
 pencilled  markings showing  lines of  high hills  or mountains  are now
 extremely  faint, and  disrupted by  a large  cracked fold  that extends
 across  the  map  through  line  M;  and  a  pencilled name  on M  16 is
 illegible save for the initial element East....                        
   The  name  Mirrormere  (L  11)  is original.  The Misty  Mountains are
 not  named,  nor  are  the Mountains  of Moria  other than  Caradras (an
 addition);  on  the 1943  map appears  also Kelebras  (p. 174  note 21),
 but not the  third peak  (Fanuiras). Afterwards  my father  pencilled on
 the  First  Map the  final names  Celebdil and  Fanuidol (so  spelt). As
 already mentioned (p. 296) Silverlode was a correction (in the  style of
 portion 'C')  of Blackroot,  itself replacing  Redway; and  the southern
 river  Blackroot  appears  on the  hidden portion  of 'A'  (Map III  ) -
 where  however  it  also  was  changed  to  Silverlode! The  change here
 should have been the other way about: for  the names  of the  two rivers
 were  transposed,  the northern  'Blackroot' becoming  'Silverlode', and
 the southern 'Silverlode' becoming 'Blackroot' (see p.  177 and  note 1,
 and p. 241 note 36). But there is no doubt that  the first  name written
 against  the  southern  river  was  Blackroot,  and  that this  was then
 changed  to  Silverlode.  Subsequently my  father struck  out Silverlode
 and  wrote stet  against Blackroot:  I suppose  therefore that  this was
 either  a  passing hesitation,  when he  thought for  a moment  of going
 back on his previous decision to change the names, or else a mere slip.
   Entish Land Q 11)  is original,  but is  absent from  the 1943  map; a
 later note against this on the First  Map says:  'Alter Entish  Lands to
 [Trollfells  >  Bergrisland  >] Ettenmoor'.  This would  seem to  be the
 place  where  Ettenmoor(s) was  first devised,  but see  p. 65  note 32.
 Bergrisland is from Old Norse berg-risi 'hill-giant'.                  
   On  the  two  sites  of Dol  Dugol (Dol  Dughul) see  p. 298.  For the
 emergence of the name Rhosgobel see p. 164.                            
   Against  Lonely  Mt.  is  pencilled  Dolereb, and  also Erebor  with a
 query (neither  of these  names appear  on the  1943 map).  Erebor first
 occurs in the fifth version of 'The Council of Elrond', p. 142  and note
 2. The Grey Mountains  and the  Iron Hills  were originally  marked only
 as names, but my father afterwards drew in the  latter, and  also rather

                  
                                                                              
 vague  pencillings  to  show  a   mountainous  region   to  west   and  south-
 west  of  the  Sea  of  Rhunaer;  these features  are shown  on the  1943 map,
 as  also  are  the  river  flowing  from  the  Iron  Hills  and  the  eastward
 extension of the River Running to  join it  (K 16  - 17),  though on  the 1943
 map  the  River  Running  is  very  much  the  major  stream  and   that  from
 the  Iron  Hills  a  slender  tributary.  Rhun  was  an  addition  in  the 'C'
 style. The name  Rhunaer (i.e.  'Eastern Sea'),  also an  addition to  'A' (as
 was the Sea itself), is unclear  on the  First Map  on account  of a  crack in
 the  paper,  but  is  confirmed  by  its  appearance  on the  1943 map  and on
 a later map of  my father's,  where, though  the Sea  itself is  not included,
 there  is  a  direction  that  the  River  Running  flows  into  the   Sea  of
 Rhunaer.  On  the  map published  in The  Lord of  the Rings,  it is  the Sea
 of  Rhun,  and there  are three  references to  the Sea  of Rhun  in Appendix
 A (see also  p. 333  in the  next chapter).  The forest  bordering the  Sea of
 Rhunaer  (L  19)  extends  on  the  First  Map  round the  north-eastern point
 of the Sea  and down  its eastern  shore (L-M  20), and  against it  my father
 pencilled  Neldoreth;  no  name  for  the  forest  is   marked  on   the  1943
 map,  which  ends  at  the  same  point  eastwards  as  does  Map  II  in this
 book.(5) The  island  in  the  Sea  is  coloured  green  on  the First  Map, and
 on the 1943 map is marked as wooded.                                          
  The  name  Bardings  on  J  15  was  a  pencilled  addition  that  appears on
 the  1943  map;  the  pencilled  addition  of  Eotheod   on  I   12,  however,
 does  not  (on  the  regions  where the  Eotheod dwelt,  at first  between the
 Carrock  and  the  Gladden  Fields  and  afterwards  in  the  region   of  the
 source-streams  of  Anduin,  Greylin  and   Langwell,  see   Unfinished  Tales
 pp. 288, 295).                                                                
  For features  marked on  the south-east  corner of  Map II,  0 -  P 15  - 19,
 see under Map III.                                                            
                                                                              
                                Maps III (A) and III.                              
                                                                              
  The  line  of  squares  P  7-19  overlaps with  Map II.  Map III  contains no
 portion  of  the  original  map 'A'  except for  the two  lines of  squares on
 the left, P - T 7 - 8, where the river (afterwards Lefnui) on Q 8-9, P 9 seems
 certainly  a  later  addition.  Map III (A) shows  the  names  and  geographical
 features  of  the  original  map  'A'  that  I  can   make  out   through  the
 overlay (pp. 298 - 9). Granting the difficulty  of seeing  what was  there, it
 is clear, I think, that when this part of 'A'  was made  the story  itself had
 not  advanced  into  these  regions,  and  only  a  few  names   and  features
 were  entered.  Comparison  of  Maps III (A) and  III  will  show  that  in  the
 second  version  Ethir   Anduin  was   moved  south   and  east,   becoming  a
 vast  delta,  and  the course  of Anduin  was entirely  changed, flowing  in a
 great   eastward   bend    between   Nindalf    and   the    Mouths,   whereas
 originally  its  course  was  almost  in  a  straight  line  south-south-west.
 Concomitantly   with   this,   Minas   Tirith   and   Osgiliath   were   moved

  almost 200 miles to the east. Only the name  and not  the actual  site of
  Minas Morgol can be  seen on  the underlying  map, but  it seems  to have
  been a good deal further to the east of  Osgiliath than  was subsequently
  the case.(6) On other  features  of  Map  III  see  pp. 298  - 9,  and on
  Blackroot > Silverlode see p. 306.                                       
    Turning to  the superimposed  portion 'C'  of the  First Map  (of which
  the uppermost horizontal line of squares 0 9-19 is found  on Map  II), as
  I have  said the  lettering and  representation of  geographical features
  were here done with an exceptionally fine pen-nib; at the same time it is
  scarcely possible to distinguish earlier and later elements by this means
  -  for  example, Harondor  ( S.  Gondor) is  obviously later  than Ondor,
  but there is nothing in  the appearance  of the  lettering to  show this.
  (Ondor  here  replaces  Ond  of  the  underlying   map;  for   the  first
  appearance of  Ondor in  the Lord  of the  Rings papers  see p.  144.) My
  1943 map is however effectively identical  with the  First Map  in almost
  every feature, and only a few points need to be specially noticed here.
    I  postpone  discussion  of  the  Dead  Marshes  and  No Man's  Land to
  the  notes on  the development  of Map  IV. The  original name  Dagras of
  the Battle Plain was  replaced in  pencil by  Dagorlad, which  appears on
  the  1943 map  but is  omitted on  the redrawing  through lack  of space.
  Kirith Ungol still  appears in  1943 as  the name  of the  chief entrance
  into  Mordor, but  I placed  Minas Morgul  (q 15)  further to  the north,
  and so further north than Minas Tirith -  very near  to the  northern tip
  of  the  Mountains  of  Shadow  (P  15).  This  change  complied  with  a
  direction by pencilled  arrow on  the First  Map (where  incidentally the
  name was originally spelt  Minas Morgol,  as on  the overlaid  portion of
  'A'  beneath).  Among several  changes that  my father  made to  the 1943
  map in these regions he replaced  Minas Morgul  in its  original position
  on  Q  15.  Another  was the  addition of  Ephel to  Duath on  both maps.
  For the significance of the two small circles on either side of the  n of
  Kirith Ungol on P 15 see p. 349 note 41.                                 
    The Nargil Pass (S 17) is clearly represented and lettered on  the 1943
  map, whereas on the First Map  it was  scribbled in  very hastily  and is
  hardly  legible  (but  apparently reads  Narghil Pass).  Mount Mindolluin
  was  similarly added  in roughly  between Minas  Tirith and  the original
  mountain  shown  in  the  north-east  corner  of Q  13, but  is carefully
  shown on mine (see note 1); the name  is left  off the  redrawing through
  lack of space.                                                           
    On  the  1943  map  only,  my  father  moved  Dol  Amroth  from R  9 to
  R  11  (south  of  the  mouth  of the  river Morthond);  on both  maps he
  changed  Belfalas  to  Anfalas;  on  the  First  Map  only,   he  changed
  Anarion  on  q  14  to  Anorien,  and  altered Land  of Seven  Streams to
  Land of  Five Streams;  and on  the 1943  map he  struck out  Anarion and
  Lebennin  (Land  of  Seven  Streams)  and  re-entered  Lebennin   in  the
  place of Anarion on q 14.                                                
    This question of the southern rivers is very  curious. In  the original

 draft  of  Gandalf's story  of his  adventures to  the Council  of Elrond
 (p.  132)  Radagast told  him that  he would  scarcely come  to Saruman's
 abode  'before  the  Nine  cross  the  Seven Rivers',  which in  the next
 version  (p.  149)  becomes  'before  the Nine  have crossed  the seventh
 river'.  In  'the  Lord  of  Moria'  (p.  177)  Boromir advises  that the
 Company  should  'take the  road to  my land  that I  followed on  my way
 hither:  through  Rohan and  the country  of Seven  Streams. Or  we could
 go  on  far  into  the  South  and  come  at   length  round   the  Black
 Mountains,  and  crossing the  rivers Isen  and Silverlode  [> Blackroot]
 enter Ond from  the regions  nigh the  sea.' I  have remarked  there that
 this  can  only mean  that the  Company would  pass through  'the country
 of Seven Streams' if they went  to Minas  Tirith by  way of  Rohan, north
 of  the  Black  Mountains.  On the  other hand,  in 'Farewell  to Lorien'
 (p. 282) Boromir on his  journey to  Rivendell 'went  round by  the south
 about  the  Black  Mountains  and  up  the  Greyflood  -  or  the Seventh
 River as we call it.' And earlier in the  same chapter  (p. 272)  he says
 that  he was  born 'between  the mountains  and the  sea, on  the borders
 of the Land of Seven Streams.'                                          
   The naming of Greyflood  the Seventh  River is  an original  element of
 the oldest portion 'A' of the First Map, and is  surely to  be associated
 with the Land of Seven Streams, especially in view of  the change  in the
 drafts of  Gandalf's tale  to the  Council of  Elrond, cited  above, from
 'the  Seven  Rivers' to  'the seventh  river'. But  what then  were these
 rivers?  I  am  certain that  there is  no river  save Blackroot  (with a
 tributary)  west of  Ethir Anduin  on the  hidden part  of A  (Map III (A)).
 Even if Anduin itself is counted, and the tributary of Blackroot,  and if
 the unnamed river (later Lefnui) is supposed a very early  addition, Isen
 is the fifth and Greyflood the sixth. I have  not been  able to  find any
 solution to this puzzle.                                                
   With  the replacement  portion 'C'  the nature  of the  puzzle changes.
 Lebennin (Land of Seven Streams)  is a  small region,  and it  is notable
 that  seven  rivers  are  indeed  shown  here  (Map  III,  Q-R 11  - 14):
 Morthond   and   an   unnamed   tributary;   Ringlo   and    an   unnamed
 tributary;  an  unnamed  river  that  enters  Anduin  above  the  Mouths;
 and  an  unnamed  river  entering Anduin  further up  its course  (R 14),
 formed  of  two tributaries  one of  which flows  from Minas Tirith.(7) But
 Greyflood,  some  450 miles  to the  north-west of  the most  westerly of
 these seven streams, remains the Seventh  River.(8) A  further twist  to the
 problem arises from  the fact  that Lebennin  does not  in any  case mean
 'Seven  Streams',  but  'Five  Streams'.  The  original  Quenya  word for
 'five' was lemin (1.246); and in  the Etymologies  (V.368) are  found the
 Quenya word  lempe 'five'  and the  Noldorin word  lheben (cf.  Q. lepse,
 N. lhebed, 'finger'). Ossiriand  was the  Land of  Seven Rivers  (cf. the
 Etymologies,  V.379,  Quenya  otso,  Noldorin  odog  'seven').  As  noted
 above,  my  father  afterwards  changed  'Seven' to  'Five' on  the First
 Map,  and  in  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  the  name Lebennin  means 'Five

 Streams': cf. The Return of the King V.1 (p.  22), 'fair  Lebennin with
 its five swift streams'.                                                
   A later map of my father's does not solve these problems, but carries
 a note that is very interesting in this connection.  When this  map was
 made Lebennin had been moved to its final position. The note reads:
                                                                       
   Rivers of Gondor.                                                    
   Anduin                                                               
      From East.                                                        
   Ithilduin or Duin Morghul.                                           
    Poros  Boundary                                                     
       From West.                                                       
   Ereg First.                                                          
   Sirith.                                      The 5 rivers.                                                 
      Lameduin (of Lamedon) with tributaries.   of Lebennin.                
      Semi (E.) and Kelos (W.)                                          
   Ringlo, Kiril, Morthond and Calenhir that                            
      all flow into Cobas Haven.                                        
   Lhefneg Fifth                                                        
   In counting only the mouths are counted: Ereg 1, Sirith 2, Lame-     
      duin 3, Morthond 4, Lhefneg 5, Isen 6, Gwathlo 7.                 
                                                                       
 Thus in relation to the final geography of the region:                 
 - Ereg (the unnamed river on the First Map flowing into Anduin on      
    R 14) became Erui.                                                  
 - Sirith (the unnamed river on the First Map flowing into Anduin on
    R 13) remained.                                                     
 - Lameduin here has tributaries Serni and Kelos, which evidently        
 constitute Lameduin from their confluence. On the First Map            
 Lameduin is Ringlo, with unnamed tributaries. In the final form        
 Lameduin became Gilrain, with its tributary Serni, while Kelos was      
 transferred to become a tributary of Sirith.(9)                        
 - Of the four rivers Ringlo, Kiril, Morthond, and Calenhir 'that all
 flow into Cobas Haven' the first three only are named on this map;     
 but though the Calenhir is not, it is shown as an unnamed river,       
 most westerly of the four, flowing eastwards from Pinnath Gelin.       
 These four rivers join together not far from the coast, and flow (as
 Morthond, according to the list of river-mouths above) into the sea 
 in the bay north of Dol Amroth, which is named Cobas Haven.(10) In        
 the final geography this configuration remains, although Calenhir is 
 lost.                                                                  
 - Lhefneg became Lefnui.                                               
 - Isen remained.                                                       
 - Gwathlo or Greyflood is on this map given an alternative name        
 Odotheg, changed to Odothui (i.e. 'seventh').                          

                                             
                                                                         
 and  the  Valley  of  Gorgoroth  see  p.  144;  cf.   also  the   Gap  of
 Gorgoroth,  p.  208.  Kirith Ungol  ('the passes  of Mordor')  appears in
 'Farewell to Lorien', p. 283. For Lithlad ('Plain of  Ash') see  pp. 208,
 213, and for the first occurrence of Orodruin p.  28. Lothlann  (U 17-18)
 was apparently an  original name  on portion  'C' of  the First  Map, but
 it  was  struck  out;  whether  it  appeared  on the  1943 map  cannot be
 said,  for  the  bottom  right-hand  corner  of  that  map  was  torn off.
 Lothlann  ('wide  and  empty')  derives  from  The Silmarillion:  see the
 Index to Vol. V.                                                         
  On  Haradwaith  (Sutherland)  see  pp.  304,  306.  The  name  Swertings
 appears  in The  Two Towers,  IV.3 (p.  255), where  Sam speaks  of 'the
 big folk down away in the Sunlands. Swertings we call 'em in  our tales.'
 Barangils is found later as a name in Gondor  for the  men of  the Harad.
                                                                         
                                Maps IV (A) to IV (E).                              
                                                                         
  We  come  now  to what  is by  far the  most complex  part of  the First
 Map, the rectangle of fifteen squares (N-P 10 - 14)  lettered 'D'  on the
 figure on p. 297,  and left  blank on  Map II.  This section  was redrawn
 and replaced many times.                                                 
                                                                         
                                    IV (A).                                    
                                                                         
  In  Map IV (A) the  uppermost line  of squares  N 10  - 14  is part  of the
 original 'A' portion of the First Map, whereas lines 0 and P are  part of
 the superimposed portion 'C';  but I  believe that  most of  the features
 and  names  shown  on  the line  N were  added in  after portion  'C' had
 been  glued  on,  and  that  there  is  no  need  to  trouble  with  this
 distinction. The little that can be seen (and very  little seems  to have
 been marked in) on lines o and  P of  the original  'A' portion  is shown
 on  Map  III (A),  where  the  line  of Anduin  below Palath  Nenui (Wetwang)
 was entirely different (see p. 307).                                     
  The vertical line of squares N-P  15 on  the right-hand  side of  Map IV (A)
 is repeated from  Map II,  and is  merely added  to make  the conjunction
 easier  to  follow (it  includes also  the remainder  of the  name Border
 Hills, which was later struck out). The  shaded area  on N-P  10 -  11 is
 invisible owing to a later pasted overlay (see under Map IV (D) below).      
  I  think  it  is certain  that the  hills marked  Green Hills  and those
 marked  Emyn  Rhain  (Border  Hills)  were put  in at  the same  time, at
 the making of portion 'C'; but I  do not  think that  they were  named at
 once. This matter is rather  complex, but  it reveals,  as I  believe, an
 interesting aspect of the relation between my father's  narrative writing
 and his maps. I set out first the various statements made in the earliest
 texts  of  the  chapter 'Farewell  to Lorien'  about the  country through
 which the Anduin flowed south of Lothlorien.                             

 (i)    The  River  winds  among  the  Border  Hills, Emyn  Rain. They
        must  decide  their  course there,  because the  Wetwang lies
        before them (p. 268).                                        
 (ii)   They pass into the Rhain Hills u here the River winds  in deep
        ravines (p. 269).                                            
 (iii)  The  Company  lands  (on  Tolondren,  the  island  in  Anduin)
        and goes up into the Rhain Hills (p. 269).                   
 (iv)   The  Company  lands on  Tolondren.... They  cross to  the East
        bank  and  go  up  into  the  Green  Hills  (or  Emyn  Rhain?)
        (p. 269).                                                    
 (v)    Elves  of  Lorien  shall  go with  the Company  as far  as the
        Green Hills  where the  River winds  among deep  ravines (with
        Rhain written above Green) (p. 271).                         
 (vi)   Keleborn speaks of the falls  of Rhain  where the  River runs
        out of the ravines in the Green Hills (p. 273).              
 (vii)  Keleborn  says that  the River  will pass  through a  bare and
        barren country  before it  flows into  the sluggish  region of
        Nindalf,  where  the Entwash  flows in.  Beyond that  are Emyn
        Rhain  the  Border  Hills...  The  Company  should  leave  the
        River u here the isle of Tolondren stands in the  stream above
        the falls of Rosfein and cross the  Entwash above  the marshes
        (pp. 281 - 2).                                               
                                                                    
   

                                                       
 (Here the Border Hills are displaced southwards, beyond Tolondren           
 and the Nindalf. Keleborn's words were rewritten to say:)                   
   (viii) the River will pass through a bare and barren country,             
          winding among the Border Hills before it falls down into the       
          sluggish region of Nindalf (p. 281).                               
                                                                            
   There is  clearly a  doubt or  confusion here  as to  the Green  Hills and
 the Border Hills,  and different  views of  how the  Border Hills  relate to
 Tolondren,  the  falls,  and the  Nindalf or  Wetwang. I  do not  think that
 any  definite  conclusion   can  be   drawn  from   these  texts   taken  by
 themselves,  but  from  the  Map  IV (A) I  believe  that  the  development can
 be tolerably well understood.                                               
   The line of hills extending  on either  side of  Anduin (N  12 -  14), and
 the hills rising to east and south-east of these (N - O 14 - 15), were drawn
 in at the same time and in the  same style,  characteristic of  portion 'C',
 with outlining in  short strokes.  The lettering,  I feel  sure, was  put in
 subsequently.  My  belief  is  that  these  ranges  were  a   datum  already
 provided,  illustrating   my  father's   words  in   his  letter   to  Naomi
 Mitchison  of  25  April 1954  (Letters no.  144), I  wisely started  with a
 map,  and made  the story  fit'; and  that the  confusing statements  in the
 earliest   'Farewell   to  Lorien'   papers  show   him  moving   towards  a
 satisfactory  relation  between the  evolving narrative,  his vision  of the
 lands  about  Anduin  in  these  regions,  and  what  was  drawn on  the map
 (i.e. these ranges of hills).                                               

   At one stage he decided that  the hills  should be  the Green  Hills and
 the Border Hills respectively. He wrote in  these names,  and at  the same
 time  extended  the  latter  (more  roughly,  and  with  dotted  outlines)
 southwest, so as to embrace both sides of Anduin (O 14, P  13 -  14). This
 perhaps illustrates  Keleborn's words  in extract  (vii) above,  where the
 Border  Hills  are  south  of  Tolondren  and  the  Nindalf.  But  in  the
 margin  of  the  First  Map  he  noted: 'Place  [?Tolondren a  little more
 south]  and  combine  Green  Hills  with  Border  Hills, and  make Nindalf
 or  Wetwang  all  round  mouths  of  Entwash.'  The  last  remark probably
 refers  to  the  curious feature  seen on  Map IV,  that the  Wetwang lies
 distinctly  northward  of  the  mouths;  that  concerning Tolondren  is no
 doubt  reflected  in  the  striking  out  of  the  name  on  N 13  and its
 reintroduction  in  a  more southerly  position (P  13, at  the confluence
 with  Anduin  of  a  stream flowing  in from  the Black  Mountains), where
 it was again struck out. This bit of the  map had  clearly become  in need
 of redrawing.                                                             
   It  may  be  noted  incidentally   that  the   stream  from   the  Black
 Mountains rises in an  oval lake  on P  11; and  it seems  perfectly clear
 that the Morthond rises in this lake also: see Map III, Q 11.             
                                                                          
                                   Map IV(B).                             
                                                                          
   What  now  happened to  the geography  is clear.  In the  extract (viii)
 above  Keleborn  says  that  the  River  will  pass  through  'a  bare and
 barren  country,  winding  among  the  Border Hills  before it  falls down
 into the sluggish region of Nindalf.' In the draft (ii) given on p. 282 he
 says that 'the trees will fail,  and you  will come  to a  barren country.
 There the river  flows in  stony vales  among high  moors, until  it comes
 to the tall island of Tolondren' (largely preserved in  FR, p.  389). Thus
 the  Brown Lands  emerge, in  place of  the original  Green Hills,  on Map
 IV(B),  which  is a  detached slip  of 9  squares that  was never  pasted in.
 Here  Tolondren  (but  no  longer so  named) is  definitively in  the more
 southerly  position,  and in  relation to  this the  course of  Entwash is
 greatly  changed,  bending  in  a  great  southward  sweep,  so  that  the
 Wetwang  is  still  south  of Tolondren  and the  falls (here  called Dant
 Ruinel,  this  name  being  struck   out:  Rauros   was  later   added  in
 pencil).(11) In fact, the new  course of  Entwash partly  takes over  that of
 the  unnamed  river  in IV(A),   flowing  in   from  the   Black  Mountains
 (P  12-13).  The  southwestward  extension  of  the  Emyn  Rhain,  lightly
 entered  on  IV(A), is  now called  Sarn Gebir  and strongly  reinforced (cf.
 Keleborn's reference to 'the bleak hills of Sarn-gebir', p. 283),  but this
 was done very coarsely, clearly after the little slip was first  drawn; on
 account  of  the  heavy  lines  marking  these  hills  other  markings are
 difficult to interpret, but it can be seen that there is now a  large lake
 (coloured  blue),  and  a  large  island  in  the lake  named the  Isle of

  Emris,(12) while  on  either  shore  are dark  spots, no  doubt representing
  Amon Hen and Amon Lhaw.                                                   
    The  name  [Staniland]  beneath  Ond(or)  was  entered  in  pencil. The
  Wold of Rohan is coloured green, as are the hills on N 12 - 13.  The river
  Limlight  now  appears  (N  12-13),  though  the  name was  only pencilled
  in later.                                                                 
                                                                           
                                    Map IV(C).                              
                                                                           
    This  is  another  detached  slip  showing  the same  9 squares  and not
  differing greatly  from IV,  save in  the representation  of Sarn Gebir to
  the west of  Anduin, where  the line  of hills  now runs  North-South. The
  names   Tolbrandir,(13) Rauros,   and  River   Limlight  were   now  entered
  (the latter  two added  in pencil  on IV  ), and  the rapids,  called Sarn-
  Ruin,  north  of  the  lake.  In  pencil  the names  Westemnet, Eastemnet,
  and  the  Entwade,  not  included  in  the  redrawing,  were added.  G was
  written  before  Ondor,  and  an  arrow  moved  Wold  of  Rohan  to  N 12,
  north  of  the  hills  (again  coloured  green)  on  N  12-13.   The  name
  (Rhov)annion  is  spelt  thus,  with  doubled  n.   The  name   Eodor  was
  entered in  pencil on  P 12,  but struck  through, and  (apparently) moved
  westwards onto P 11 (the six squares N - P 10-i 1 at this time existing in
  the  form  they  have  on  Map  IV,  where  however  much  is  obliterated
  by later overlay).                                                        
                                                                           
                                Maps IV(D) and IV(E).                              
                                                                           
    Map IV(D) is  a section  of twelve  squares (N-P  10-13) which  was glued
  onto  the  map  when  it  was  in the  state represented  by Map  IV(A), but
  here the glue has only adhered  on the  left-hand side,  and thus  much of
  IV(A) is revealed. The  vertical line  of squares  N-P 14  was cut  off from
  IV(C), and  IV(D) was  drawn to  join (more  or less)  with this  strip. Then,
  the  four  squares  0-P 10-11  were overlaid  by yet  another superimposed
  section (IV(E)), and here the corresponding part of IV is totally hidden.
    On  IV(D) pencilled  changes  made  to  IV(C) were  now  included: Gondor
  for  Ondor,  the  Entwade,   Eastemnet  and   Westemnet,  and   the  move-
  ment  of  the  Wold  of  Rohan   northwards.  The   two  great   loops  in
  Anduin  on  N  13  (afterwards  called  the North  and South  Undeeps: see
  Unfinished  Tales  p.  260  and  Index, entry  Undeeps) appear,(14) while the
  course  of  Limlight  is  changed.  No  name  is  given  to the  rapids in
  Anduin  - Sarn is not  written to  join with  Ruin on  the strip  cut from
  IV(C);  Sarn Gebir  was  written  here  subsequently  in  pencil.  The  names
  Anarion on Q 14 (Map III)  and Ithilien  opposite on  the eastern  bank of
  Anduin were entered  at the  same time  as Anarion  on P  13 here.  On the
  First  Map  my  father  changed Anarion  to Anorien  on Q  14; on  my 1943
  map  he  changed  Anarion  to  Anorien  on  P  13,  whereas  on  Q  14  he
  changed  Anarion  to  Lebennin  (p.  310).  On  the  western  side  of the

  Misty  Mountains  Dunland  was  entered (N  10), and  against the  vale to
  the south was written Westfold, which was struck through.                 
    It  seems  that  when  map  IV(E)  was  glued  on  much  of  the adjoining
  region  on  IV(D) was  rather  coarsely  overdrawn,  and  this  is   a  very
  difficult part to  interpret and  to represent;  but as  this part  of the
  geography has not yet been reached in the  texts I  shall not  consider it
  here.  The  westward  extension  of  the  Black  Mountains  on P  8-9 (Map
  III) belongs with this.(15) Map IV(E) is the  first representation  of Isengard
  and  the  Gap  of  Rohan   that  can   be  reached,   IV"  and   IV  being
  invisible.  Here  appear  Helm's  Deep,   Tindtorras  (earlier   name  for
  Thrihyrne),  the  Ford   of  Isen,   Dunharrow,  and   Methedras.  Eodoras
  appears  on  P  11  (see above  under Map  IV ),.  Eastfold appears  to be
  represented  by  a  dot,  which  may  however be  no more  than a  mark on
  the paper; and Westfold is pencilled  in along  the northern  foothills of
  the  Black  Mountains.  The  letters  rch  on  0-P  10  continue  the name
  Middlemarch (see Map II).                                                 
    On  IV(D-E) (but  not  on  the  1943  map)  certain  roads  or   tracks  are
  shown  which  I  have not  inserted on  the redrawing.  At about  12 miles
  NNW of  Eodoras there  is a  road-meeting: one  road goes  to the  Ford of
  Isen, keeping near to the foothills  but running  across the  outer limits
  of the  Westfold Vale;  another goes  north-east to  the Entwade  and then
  north  along  the  east  bank of  Entwash, passing  between the  river and
  the  downs;  and  a  third  runs  south-east  and  east  to  Minas Tirith,
  crossing the streams that flow down into Entwash.                         
    The 1943 map is  here anomalous  and I  cannot relate  it to  the series
  of  replacements  made  to  the  First  Map.  My  map  was  obviously made
  when  the  First  Map  had  reached its  present state  (i.e. when  IV had
  been stuck on, and IV(E) on top of a part of  that), for  it agrees  in every
  feature  and  name  in  its  representation  of  the  Gap  of   Rohan  and
  Helm's  Deep;   Dunland,  Methedras,   Tindtorras,  Dunharrow,   etc.  all
  appear.  On  the  other  hand,  the  courses  of  Anduin  and  Limlight on
  N 12 - 13 are very distinctly as on Map IV(C). Seeing that the course of the
  Entwash in the square below (O 12) is carefully  represented in  the later
  form  of  IV(D), this  is inexplicable,  except on  the assumption  that the
  courses of Anduin  and Limlight  on N  12 -  13 (introducing  the Undeeps)
  were  changed  after  the  1943  map had  been made;  but I  cannot detect
  any sign of  alteration or  erasure on  IV(D).  On the  1943 map  the rapids
  in Anduin are named Sarn Ruin, and the hills Sarn Gebir.                 
    My   father   afterwards   changed  Black   Mountains  to   White  Moun-
  tains on the 1943 map (only).                                             
                                                                           
                      No Man's Land and the Dead Marshes.                   
                                                                           
    In 'Farewell to Lorien' (p. 281) Keleborn says that beyond the          
  Wetwang are the Nomenlands, dreary Uvanwaith that lies before the         
  passes of Mordor; and in a  subsequent draft  of the  passage (p.  283) he

 speaks of the bleak hills of Sarn-gebir, where the  wind blows  from the
 East, for they  look out  over the  Dead Marshes  and the  Nomenlands to
 the  passes  of Mordor:  Kirith Ungol.  With the  later names  Emyn Muil
 and Cirith Gorgor, this was  retained in  FR (p.  390): 'On  the further
 side are the bleak hills of the Emyn Muil. The wind blows from  the East
 there,  for  they look  out over  the Dead  Marshes and  the Noman-lands
 to  Cirith  Gorgor  and the  black gates  of Mordor.'  This is  the land
 described in The Two Towers, IV.2 (p. 238):                           
                                                                       
   The  air was  now clearer  and colder,  and though  still far  off, the
   walls  of  Mordor  were  no  longer  a  cloudy  menace  on the  edge of
   sight, but as grim  black towers  they frowned  across a  dismal waste.
   The  marshes  were  at  an  end, dying  away into  dead peats  and wide
   flats  of  dry  cracked  mud.  The  land  ahead  rose  in  long shallow
   slopes, barren and pitiless, towards  the desert  that lay  at Sauron's
   gate.                                                                
                                                                       
 And  when  Sam  and  Frodo  at  last  approached  the Black  Gate (ibid.
 p. 239):                                                               
                                                                       
   Frodo  looked  round  in  horror.  Dreadful  as  the Dead  Marshes had
   been,  and  the  arid  moors  of  the  Noman-lands [First  Edition: of
   Nomen's  land],  more  loathsome   far  was   the  country   that  the
   crawling day now slowly unveiled to his shrinking eyes.              
                                                                       
   It  will  be  seen that  when the  mouths of  Entwash and  the Wetwang
 were  moved  south  (Maps  IV(B), IV(C))  'No Man's  Land' lay  between the
 Wetwang  and  the  Dead  Marshes.  My  1943  map  is in  complete agree-
 ment  with  this.  On  my  father's  later  maps, when  the geographical
 relations  in  this  region had  shifted somewhat,  the Wetwang  and the
 Dead  Marshes  are  continuous,  and  no  map  later  than that  of 1943
 shows   No   Man's   Land   (Noman-lands,  Nomenlands,   Nomen's  Land).
 From these passages in The Two Towers, however, it is plain  that this
 region of 'long shallow slopes, barren and  pitiless', of  'arid moors',
 that  succeeded  the marshes  still lay  between Frodo  and Sam  and the
 pass  into  Mordor  (see  the  large-scale  map  of  Gondor  and  Mordor
 accompanying The Return of the King).                                  
                                                                       
   After this demanding journey  across the  First Map  we can  return to
 the lands themselves, and  in the  next chapter  follow the  fortunes of
 (unexpectedly, as it may seem) Sam and Frodo.                          
                                                                       
                                  NOTES.                                
                                                                       
 1. A note of my father's about this map is extant:                     
    This map was made before the story was complete. It is          
    incomplete and much is missed out.                                    
    Chief errors are in Gondor and Mordor. The White Moun-

     tains  are  not  in  accord  with  the  story.  Lebennin   should  be
     Belfalas.   Mindolluin   should    be   immediately    behind   Minas
     Tirith,   and   the  distance   across  the   vale  of   Anduin  much
     reduced,  so  that  Minas  Tirith  is  close  to Osgiliath  and Osgi-
     liath closer to Minas Morgul. Kirith Ungol is misplaced.             
                                                                         
  2. The  style  in  which  natural features  were represented  varied. In
     particular,  my  father  when  drawing   the  Black   Mountains  sur-
     rounded  them  with  a   fine  continuous   line  (whereas   for  the
     Mountains  of  Shadow  and  Ered  Lithui  he  used  small  strokes to
     define the foothills), and this can be very confusing in  relation to
     the  similar lines  representing streams  falling from  the mountains
     (see  note 7).  To make  my redrawing  as clear  as possible,  I have
     substituted  lines  of  dots  or  small  strokes in  representing the
     foothills of the Black Mountains (see note 15).                      
  3. On  the  revised  map first  published in  Unfinished Tales  an arrow
     directs that the name  Icebay of  Forochel applies  to the  great bay
     of which the southern bay is only a small part.                      
  4. In the absence of 'sea-lines' the inner line could itself be taken to
     be the coast;  but on  my 1943  map the  coastline follows  the outer
     line  on  the  First Map  (and neither  the inner  wavy line  nor the
     small  circular  area  are  present).  This  no  doubt   followed  my
     father's instruction.                                                
  5. For another  use of  Neldoreth, from  the legends  of the  First Age,
     in The Lord of the Rings see VI.384.                                 
  6. The  three  cities  were still  relatively far  apart on  the redrawn
     portion  'C'  of  the  First  Map,  repeated  on  the  1943  map; see
     note 1.                                                              
  7. That this river flowed from Minas  Tirith is  not perfectly  clear on
     the First Map, owing to  a difficulty  in distinguishing  between the
     fine  lines  that  mark  the  outer  contours  of  the  mountains and
     those  that  mark streams  (see note  2); but  on my  1943 map  it is
     shown  very  clearly  as  flowing  out  of  the city  (and I  have so
     redrawn it on Map III).                                              
  8. This is still the case not only on the 1943 map but  also on  a later
     map of my father's (p. 312).                                         
  9. This is  a convenient  place to  notice that  the redrawn  version of
     the LR map first published  in Unfinished  Tales contains  an error,
     in that I showed Sirith as the western arm and Celos,  its tributary,
     as the eastern, whereas it should  be the  reverse (as  it is  on the
     large-scale  map  of  Mordor,  Gondor,  and  Rohan  in The  Return of
     the King).                                                           
 10. Cobas  Haven:  cf.  Kopas  Alqalunte  in  The  Book  of   Lost  Tales
     (1.257  and  Index).  In  the  Etymologies  (V.364  - 5)  Quenya kopa
     'harbour,  bay'  was given  under the  stem KOP,  but this  entry was
     replaced   by   a   stem   KHOP,   whence   Quenya   hopa,   Noldorin
     hobas, as in Alfobas = Alqualonde.                                   

 11. For Dant-ruin, Dant-ruinel, and Rauros see pp. 283, 285.     
 12. This name  can in  fan only  be made  out in  the light  of the
    appearance of the Isle of Emris in a time-scheme of  this period
    (see  p.  367),  where  it was  changed to  Eregon, and  that to
    Tolbrandir. On the fair copy manuscript of 'Farewell  to Lorien'
    Tolondren was changed to Eregon (p. 285)-                       
 13. For earlier forms Brandor, Tol Brandor see p. 285.              
 14. The divided course of Anduin on o 13 is very clear on the map.
 15. I have represented the extension of the Black Mountains on P 8-9
    with dots and strokes to make it  consistent with  the represen-
    tation  of  mountains  elsewhere  on  Map III  (see note  2); in
    the original the contours are shown by  continuous lines,  as on
    Map IV(E).                                                        
