                                    XVI.                                  
                          THE STORY FORESEEN FROM                        
                                  LORIEN.                                
                                                                        
                                    (i)                                  
                       The Scattering of the Company.                    
                                                                        
 It  seems  certain  that  before  my  father  wrote  the   conclusion  of
 'Farewell  to  Lorien'  -  that  is,  from  the  point where  the Company
 returned  to  the  hythe and  departed down  the Great  River -  he began
 to  write  a  new  and  very substantial  outline of  the way  ahead. The
 opening  pages  of this  outline are  complex, and  at the  beginning the
 text was much altered, though  it is  clear that  my father  was changing
 the embryonic story as he wrote and that  the layers  of the  text belong
 together. The notes are here again an essential part of the elucidation.
  At  the  head  of  the text  he wrote,  in a  second stage,  'XXI', then
 changed  it  to  'XX  continued'  and  after   the  opening   words  'The
 Company  sets  off  from  Tongue'  wrote  in  'XXI'.  On  the arrangement
 of chapters in this outline see pp. 329 - 30.(1)                        
                                                                        
  The Company sets off from Tongue.                                      
  They are attacked with arrows.(2)                                      
                  They come to [struck out: Stony] Stoneait [struck out:
 Tolharn]   Tollernen (3) [added:   sheersided   except   on   North   where
 there  [is]  a  little  shingle  beach. It  rises to  a high  brown hill,
 higher  than  the  low  brown  hills  on  either  bank.  They   land  and
 camp  on  the  island].  Debate  whether  to  go  East  or   West.  Frodo
 feels  it  in his  heart that  he should  go East  and crosses  over with
 Sam  to  east  shore  and  climbs  a  hill,  and  looks   out  south-east
 towards  the  Gates  of  Mordor.  He  tells  Sam  that  he  wishes  to be
 alone  for  a  while  and  bids  him  go  back  [and]  guard the  boat on
 which   they   had   crossed   from   the   Island.   Meanwhile   Boromir
 taking  another  boat  crossed  over.  He  hides  his  boat   in  bushes.
 [This  passage  changed   to  read:   Debate  whether   to  go   East  or
 West.  Frodo  feels  it  in  his  heart  that  he  should  go   East  and
 climbs  the  tall hill  in the  midst of  the island.  Sam goes  with him
 but near  the top  Frodo says  to him  that he  is going  to sit  on hill
 top  alone  and  bids  him  wait  for  him.  Frodo  sits alone  and looks

 out towards Mordor over Sarn Gebir and Nomen's land.(4)                 
 Meanwhile    Boromir    has    crept     away    from     Company    and
 climbed hill from west side.]                                           
  As  Frodo  is  sitting  alone  on  hill  top,  Boromir  comes  suddenly
 up  and  stands  looking  at  him.  Frodo  is   suddenly  aware   as  if
 some  unfriendly  thing  is  looking  at  him   behind.  He   turns  and
 sees only Boromir smiling with a friendly face.                         
  'I feared for  you,' said  Boromir, 'with  only little  Sam. It  is ill
 to  be  alone  on  the  east  side  of  the  River.(5) Also  my  heart  is
 heavy,  and  I  wished  to talk  a while  with you.  Where there  are so
 many  all  speech  becomes  a  debate  without  end  in the  conflict of
 doubting wills.'                                                        
  'My  heart  too  is  heavy,'  said  Frodo,  'for   I  feel   that  here
 doubts  must  be  resolved;  and  I  foresee  the  breaking  up  of  our
 fair company, and that is a grief to me.'                               
  'Many   griefs   have  we   had,'  said   Boromir,  and   fell  silent.
 There  was  no  sound;  only  the  cold  rustle of  the chill  East wind
 in the withered heather. Frodo shivered.                                
  Suddenly Boromir spoke again.                                          
  'It  is  a  small  thing  that  lies  so  heavy  on  our   hearts,  and
 confuses   our   purposes,'  said   Boromir.  [Here   include  conversa-
 tion   written   above   and   bring  down   to  Boromir's   attempt  to
 seize the Ring.]                                                        
                                                                        
  This last sentence was  written continuously  with the  preceding text.
 The  conversation  referred  to  is found  on two  pages of  the 'August
 1940' examination paper, written in pencil  so faint  and rapid  that my
 father  went  over  it  more  clearly in  ink, although,  so far  as the
 underlying text can be  made out,  he followed  it almost  exactly. This
 obviously preceded the new outline into which it is inserted, and  was a
 development from the  scene in  the previous  Plot ('The  Story Foreseen
 from Moria') given on p. 208, where the debate,  Boromir's intervention,
 and Frodo's flight wearing the Ring all take place 'at Angle':  here the
 scene is set 'at the Stone  Hills, whence  Eredwethion (6) can  be glimpsed'
 (these words being visible in the  underlying text  also). In  the notes
 given on p. 233 the 'parting of the ways' took place 'at Stonehills'; in
 the outlines for 'Farewell to Lorien' (pp. 268 - 9)  the debate  and the
 'scene  with Boromir'  follow the  landing on  Tolondren and  the ascent
 into the Green Hills, or the Emyn Rhain.                                
                                                                        
  Conversation   of   Boromir    and   Frodo    at   the    Stone   Hills,
  whence   Eredwethion   can   be   glimpsed  like   a  smudge   of  grey,
  and  behind  it  a  vague  cloud  lit beneath  occasionally by  a fitful
  glow.                                                                  

   'It  is a  small thing  from which  we suffer  so much  woe,' said
 Boromir. 'I have seen it but once for  an instant,  in the  house of
 Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again?'                     
   Frodo  looked  up.  His  heart  went  suddenly  cold. He  caught a
 curious  gleam  in  Boromir's  eye,  though  his face  otherwise was
 friendly and smiling as of old.                                    
   'It is best to let it lie hid,' he answered.                     
   'As you will. I care not,' said Boromir. 'Yet I will  confess that
 it is of the Ring that I wish to  speak. (Yet  hidden or  revealed I
 would wish now to speak to you of the Ring?)... [sic]              
   Boromir says that Elrond etc. are all foolish. 'It  is mad  not to
 use  the  power  and  methods  of  the  Enemy:  ruthless,  fearless.
 Many  elves,  half-elves,  and wizards  might be  corrupted by  it -
 but not so  a true  Man. Those  who deal  in magic  will use  it for
 hidden  Power. Each  to his  kind. You,  Frodo, for  instance, being
 a  hobbit  and  desiring peace:  you use  it for  invisibility. Look
 what a warrior could  do! Think  what I  - or  Aragorn, if  you will
 -  could  do!  How  he  would  fare  among the  enemy and  drive the
 Black Riders! It would give power of command.                      
   'And yet Elrond tells us  not only  to throw  it away  and destroy
 it - that  is understandable  (though not  to my  mind wise  since I
 have pondered  on it  by night  on our  journey). But  what a  way -
 walk  into  the  enemy's  net   and  offer   him  every   chance  of
 re-capturing it!'                                                  
   Frodo is obdurate.                                               
   'Come  at  least  to  Minas-tirith!'  said  Boromir.  He  laid his
 hand on Frodo's  shoulder in  friendly fashion,  but Frodo  felt his
 arm  tremble  as  if  with  suppressed  excitement.   Frodo  stepped
 away and stood further off.                                        
   'Why  are  you  so  unfriendly?'  said  Boromir.  'I am  a valiant
 man  and  true,'  he  said. 'And  I give  you my  word that  I would
 not keep it - would not, that is I should say, if you would  lend it
 to me. Just to make trial!'                                        
   No!  No!  said  Frodo.  [Added:  It  is  mine  alone  by  fate  to
 bear.']                                                            
   Boromir  gets  more  angry,  and so  more incautious  (or actually
 evil purpose now only  begins to  grow in  him). 'You  are foolish!'
 he cried. 'Doing yourself to death  and ruining  our cause.  Yet the
 Ring  is  not  yours, save  by chance.  It might  as well  have been
 Aragorn's - or mine. Give  it to  me! Then  you will  be rid  of it,
 and  of  all  responsibility.  You would  be free'  (cunningly) 'You
 can lay the blame on me, if you will, saying that  I was  too strong

 and  took  it  by  force.  For  I  am  too strong  for you,  Frodo,' he
 said.  And  now  an  ugly  look  had  come suddenly  over his  fair and
 pleasant face. He got to his feet and sprang at Frodo.                
   Frodo  could  do  nothing  else.   He  slipped   the  Ring   on,  and
 vanished   among   the   rocks.  Boromir   cursed,  and   groped  among
 the rocks. Then suddenly the fit left him, and he wept.               
   'What  folly  possessed  me!'  he  said.   'Come  back,   Frodo!'  he
 called. 'Frodo! Evil came into my heart, but I have put it away.'     
   But  Frodo  was  now  frightened,  and  he  hid  until  Boromir  went
 back  to  camp.  Standing  on  rocks  he  saw  nothing  about  him  but
 a  grey  formless  mist,  and  far  away  (yet  black  and   clear  and
 hard)  the  Mountains  of  Mordor:  the  fire  seemed  very  red.  Fell
 voices  in  air.  Feels  Eye  searching,  and though  it does  not find
 him, he feels its attention is suddenly arrested (by himself).(7)     
                                                                      
   Here the inserted text ends and the new Plot continues:             
                                                                      
   Then  Frodo  took  counsel  with  himself,  and  he   perceived  that
 the  evil   of  the   Ring  was   already  at   work  even   among  the
 Company.  (Also  its evil  was again  on him,  since he  had put  it on
 again.)  He  said  to  himself:  this  is   laid  on   me.  I   am  the
 Ringbearer  and  none  can  help  me.  I  will  not  emperil  the other
 hobbits or any of my companions. I will depart alone.                 
   He  slips  away  unseen  and  coming  to  the  boats  takes  one  and
 crosses over to the East.                                             
   Boromir  is  now  himself  frightened   and  though   (half)  repent-
 ing his  own greed  for the  Ring the  curse has  not wholly  left him.
 He  ponders  what  tale  he shall  tell to  the others.  Hastening back
 to  the  River  he  comes  upon  Sam,  who  anxious  at   Frodo's  long
 absence is coming to the hill-top to find him.                        
   'Where is my master?' says Sam.                                     
   'I  left  him  on  the  hill-top,' said  Boromir, but  something wild
 and  odd  in  his  face  caused  Sam  sudden   fear.  'What   have  you
 done  with  him?'  'I  have done  nothing,' said  Boromir. 'It  is what
 he has done himself: he has put on the ring and vanished! '           
   'Thank  goodness  the  island  is  not  large,'  said  Sam  in  great
 alarm,  but  he  thought  also  to  himself:  'And  what  made  him  do
 that,  I  should  like  to  know.  What  mischief  has this  great fool
 been  up  to?'  Without  another  word  to  Boromir  he  ran   back  to
 the  camp  to  find  Trotter.  'Master  Frodo  has  disappeared!  '  he
 cried.                                                                
   Consternation.   The   hunt.   Some   scour   the  island.   But  Sam
 discovers  the fact  that a  boat is  missing. Has  Frodo gone  East or

 West?  Trotter  decides  that  they  cannot   hope  to   recapture  Frodo
 against  his  will,  but  they  must  follow  him  if  they   can.  Which
 way?                                                                     
   [Or  make  Island  inaccessible:  steep  shores.  Black   birds  circle
 high  above  its tall  cliffs and  central summit.  Distant noise  of the
 falls   of   Dantruinel.(8) They   camp   on   west   shore.   Hence  when
 Frodo  is  lost  they  all  go  after  him.  Thus  Pippin  and  Merry get
 separated.(9) Sam   sits  alone   and  so   discovers  missing   boat.  He
 takes   another   and   goes  after   Frodo.]  [Against   this  bracketed
 passage is written Yes.]                                                 
                                                                         
   It is clear that my father at once accepted his suggestion in this last
 passage  that the  Company camped  on the  west bank,  not on  the island
 in   the   river,   because   that  passage   contains  the   words  'Sam
 discovers  missing  boat.  He takes  another and  goes after  Frodo', and
 this, as will be seen in a moment, is  a necessary  element in  the story
 that follows.                                                            
                                                                         
   Boromir  is for  West. In  any case  he says  he is  afraid -  the Ring
 will  fall   now  almost   certainly  into   the  Enemy's   hands.  'This
 madness  was  set  [in]  him  for  that  purpose.'(10) He  wishes   to  get
 now  to  Minas-Tirith  as  quick  as  possible.   Sam  goes   West  [read
 East], others East [read West].                                          
   Sam  picks  up   trail  of   Frodo.(11) How?   He  finds   boat  knocking
 against  the  bank.(12) A little  further he  finds a  scrap of  grey stuff
 on  a  bramble  -  a  great  bramble  tract  has  to  be   crossed.  Very
 soon  Sam  discovered  that  he   was  lost   in  a   pathless  listening
 land.  But  he  felt  sure  his  master  would  steer  towards  the Fiery
 Mt.  Away  on  his  right  the  falls  roared.   He  climbed   down  into
 the  Wetwang.  Daylight  fell.  Slept  in  tree.  Heard  Gollum  at  foot
 and  tried  to  track  him,  thinking  he  was  after  Frodo. But  Sam is
 not  clever  enough  for   Gollum,  who   is  soon   aware  of   him  and
 turns  and  discovers  him.  He  confesses  to  Gollum  t  hat  h  e  i s
 trying to find Frodo.                                                    
   Gollum  laughs.  'Then  his  luck  is  better  than he  deserves, yes,'
 said   Gollum,   'for  Gollum   has  been   following  him:   Gollum  can
 see footprints where he can't see nothings, no! '                        
   Gollum   was  so   intent  on   the  trail   -  muttering   to  himself
 'Footsteps,   Gollum   sees  them,   and  he   smells  them:   Gollum  is
 wary'  -  that  he  did  not  seem  aware  of  Sam's  (relatively) clumsy
 efforts at stalking the stalker.(13)                                        
   It  was  near  the  evening  of  the  second  day  when   Frodo,  every
 sense  keyed  up,  became  suddenly  aware  of  footfalls.  He   puts  on
 the   ring,  but   Gollum  comes   up  and   circles  near.   To  Frodo's

 great  surprise  Sam  appears.  To  the  equal  surprise  of   Sam  and
 Gollum Frodo suddenly takes off ring and stands before them.           
   Gollum  is  the  most  surprised:  for  between  Frodo  and   Sam  he
 is   overmatched.   He  cringes:   for  as   Ringbearer  Frodo   has  a
 power  over  him  (though  he  is  really an  object of  great hatred).
 Gollum  pleads  for   forgiveness,  and   promises  help,   and  having
 nowhere  else  to  turn  Frodo  accepts.  Gollum  says  he   will  lead
 them   over   the  Dead   Marshes  to   Kirith  Ungol.(14) (Chuckling  to
 himself  to  think that  that is  just the  way he  would wish  them to
 go.)                                                                   
                           Here ends Chapter.                           
                                                                       
   At this stage my father was following the previous Plot (p. 208): 'At
 point where Sam, Frodo and  Gollum meet  return to  others -  for whose
 adventures see later. But they should be  told at  this point.'  He now
 decided, I think, that not even so much of the story  of Frodo  and Sam
 east of Anduin should yet be told,  and he  bracketed all  that follows
 from 'Sam picks up trail of Frodo',  writing against  it 'Put  in later
 chapter. XXIV (subsequently altering XXIV to XXV: see p. 330).(15)     
 At the same time he struck  out 'Here  ends Chapter'  and went  on with
 the story of the other members of the Company.                         
                                                                       
   Dismay  of  the  hunt  at  finding  no   trace  of   Frodo.  Boromir,
 Legolas,  Gimli,  Trotter  return  to  camp,  only  to  find  now  that
 Sam also is missing, and Pippin and Merry as well.                     
   Trotter  is  overwhelmed  with  grief,  thinking  that he  has failed
 in   his   charge  as   Gandalf's successor.   He  imagines   that  the
 hobbits are all together,. and waits in camp until the morning.(16)    
   In  the  morning  no  sign  is   found  of   them.  The   Company  is
 now  broken.  Trotter  sees  nothing  for  it  but   to  go   south  to
 Minas-Tirith   with   Boromir.   But   Legolas   and   Gimli   have  no
 further  heart  for  the  Quest,  and  feel   that  already   too  many
 leagues   are   between   them   and   their   homes.  They   go  north
 again:  Legolas  meaning  to  join  the  Elves  of  Lothlorien   for  a
 while, Gimli hoping to get back to the Mountain.(17)                   
                          Here ends Chapter XX.                         
                                                                       
 ('Chapter  XX'  was  subsequently  changed  to  'XXI', and  the numbers
 of  the  chapter synopses  that follow  were also  altered, as  will be
 explained in a moment.)                                                
                                                                       
     XXI What happened to Gimli and Legolas. They meet
         Gandalf?                                                       
     XXII What happened to Merry and Pippin. They are lost -
          led astray by echoes - in the hunt, and wander away up

   the  Entwash River  and come  to Fangorn.  Here they                   
   meet with Giant Fangorn or Tree-beard. He takes them                   
   to Minas Tirith.                                                       
 XXIII. What happened in Minas Tirith. Siege by Sauron and              
   Saruman.   Treachery  of   Boromir.  Sudden   arrival  of              
   Gandalf   -   now  become   a  white   wizard.  Treebeard              
   raises the siege.  Enemy driven  over the  Anduin. Horse-              
   men of Rohan come to assistance.                                       
 XXIV.  What happened to Frodo and Sam.                                   
                                                                         
 Comparison  with  the  previous  Plot  (pp.  210  -  11)  will  show that
 these synopses repeat, much  more briefly,  what was  set out  there, and
 show  no further  development. At  this juncture  my father  made various
 alterations of chapter-structure in the plot-sketch. At the beginning, as
 already noted  (p. 324),  he indicated  that 'The  Company sets  off from
 Tongue'  should  form  the  conclusion  of   Chapter  XX   ('Farewell  to
 Lorien'), while all that follows  should constitute  XXI (apart  from the
 story  of  Sam's  tracking  of  Frodo  and  the  encounter  with  Gollum,
 which would be placed in a later  chapter, as  already decided:  p. 329).
 The  brief  synopses  just  given  were   now  renumbered   and  slightly
 reordered:  XXII  (Merry   and  Pippin);   XXIII  (Gimli   and  Legolas);
 XXIV (Minas Tirith)., XXV (Frodo and Sam).(18)                           
                                                                         
                               (ii) Mordor.                               
                                                                         
 While  my  father seems  never to  have doubted  that after  the breaking
 of  the Company  the 'western'  stories must  be followed,  the 'eastern'
 story of Frodo  and Sam  was bursting  into life  and expression;  and he
 now  at  once  went  on with  the outline  of that  story from  the point
 where he  had left  it (p.  329), noting:  'XXV: continuation  after part
 above.'                                                                  
                                                                         
 They   sleep   in   pairs,   so   that   one   is   always   awake  with
 Gollum.(19)                                                              
 Gollum  all  the   while  is   scheming  to   betray  Frodo.   He  leads
 them   cleverly   over   the   Dead  Marshes.   There  are   dead  green
 faces  in  the  stagnant  pools;  and  the dry  reeds hiss  like snakes.
 Frodo feels the strength of the searching eye as they proceed.           
 At  night  Sam   keeps  watch,   only  pretending   to  be   asleep.  He
 hears  Gollum  muttering  to   himself,  words   of  hatred   for  Frodo
 and lust for the Ring.                                                   
 The    three    companions    now    approach    Kirith    Ungol,    the
 dreadful   ravine   which   leads    into   Gorgoroth.    Kirith   Ungol
 means  Spider  Glen:  there  dwelt  great  spiders,  greater  than those

    
                                                                      
 of  Mirkwood,  such  as  were once  of old  in the  land of  Elves and
 Men  in  the  West  that is  now under  sea, such  as Beren  fought in
 the  dark   canons  of   the  Mountains   of  Terror   above  Doriath.
 Already  Gollum  knew  these  creatures  well.  He  slips   away.  The
 spiders  come  and  weave  their  nets  over  Frodo while  Sam sleeps:
 sting  Frodo.  Sam  wakes,  and  sees  Frodo  lying  pale  as  death -
 greenish: reminding  him of  the faces  in the  pools of  the marshes.
 He cannot rouse or wake him.(20)                                      
 The  idea  suddenly  comes  to  Sam  to  carry  on  the  work,  and he
 felt for the Ring. He could  not unclasp  it, nor  cut the  chain, but
 he  drew  the chain  over Frodo's  head. As  he did  so he  fancied he
 felt  a  tremor  (sigh  or shudder)  pass through  the body;  but when
 he  paused  he  could  not  feel  any  heart-beat.  Sam  put  the Ring
 round his own neck.                                                   
 [Suddenly   the   Orc-guard   of   the   Pass,   guided   by   Gollum,
 comes  upon  them.  Sam  takes  Galadriel's  present  to  Frodo  - the
 phial  of  light.  Sam  slips  on  the  Ring,  and  attempts  to fight
 unseen   to   defend  Frodo's   body;  but   gets  knocked   down  and
 nearly  trampled  to  death.  The  Orcs  rejoicing  pick up  Frodo and
 bear  him  away,  after  searching in  vain (but  only a  short while)
 for 'the other hobbit' reported by Gollum.]                           
                                                                      
 This  last  paragraph,  which  I  have  bracketed, was  struck through
 with a direction to replace it by the following much longer passage on
 a separate page. It is clear, however, that  this replacement  was not
 written significantly later.(21)                                      
                                                                      
 Then  he  sat  and  made  a  Lament  for  Frodo.  After  that  he  put
 away  his  tears  and  thought  what  he  could   do.  He   could  not
 leave  his  dear  master lying  in the  wild for  the fell  beasts and
 carrion  birds;  and  he thought  he would  try and  build a  cairn of
 stones  about  him. 'The  silver mail  of mithril  rings shall  be his
 winding-sheet,'  he  said.  'But  I  will  lay   the  phial   of  Lady
 Galadriel upon his breast, and Sting shall be at his side.'           
 He  laid  Frodo  upon   his  back   and  crossed   his  arms   on  his
 breast and set Sting at  his side.  And as  he drew  out the  phial it
 blazed with light.  It lit  Frodo's face  and it  looked now  pale but
 beautiful,  fair  with  [an]  elvish beauty  as of  one long  past the
 shadows.  'Farewell,  Frodo,'  said  Sam;  and   his  tears   fell  on
 Frodo's hands.                                                        
 [But]  at  that  moment  there  was  a   sound  of   strong  footfalls
 climbing  towards  the  rock shelf.  Harsh calls  and cries  echoed in
 the rocks. Orcs were coming, evidently guided to the spot.            

   'Curse  that  Gollum,'  said  Sam.  'I  might  have  known  we had
 not seen the last of him. These are some of his friends.'          
   Sam  had  no  time to  lose. Certainly  no time  to hide  or cover
 his  master's  body.  Not  knowing  what  else to  do he  slipped on
 the Ring, and then  he took  also the  phial so  that the  foul Orcs
 should  not  get  it,  and  girded  Sting about  his own  waist. And
 waited. He had not long to wait.                                   
   In  the  gloom  first  came  Gollum  sniffing  out the  scent, and
 behind him came  the black  orcs: fifty  or more  it seemed.  With a
 cry they rushed  upon Frodo.  Sam tried  to put  up a  fight unseen,
 but  even  as  he  was  about  to  draw  Sting he  was run  down and
 trampled  by  the  rush  of  the  Orcs. All  the breath  was knocked
 out of his body.  [Added in  pencil: Courage  failed him.]  In great
 glee the Orcs seized Frodo and lifted him.                         
   'There   was  another,   yes,'  whined   Gollum.  'Where   is  he,
 then?'  said  the   Orcs.  'Somewheres   nigh.  Gollum   feels  him,
 Gollum sniffs him.'                                                
   'Well, you  find him,  sniveller,' said  the Orc-chief.  'He can't
 go  far  without  getting  into  trouble.  We've  got what  we want.
 Ringbearer!  Ringbearer!'   They  shouted   in  joy.   'Make  haste.
 Make  haste.  Send  one  swift  to  Baraddur to  the Great  One. But
 we  cannot  wait  here  -  we  must  [get] back  to our  guard post.
 Bear  the  prisoner  to  Minas  Morgul.'  [Added  in  pencil: Gollum
 runs behind wailing that the Precious is not there.]               
                                                                   
   Here the replacement text ends.                                  
                                                                   
   Even  as  they  do  so,  Frodo seems  to awake,  and gives  a loud
 cry, but they gag  him. Sam  is torn between joy  at learning  he is
 alive and horror at seeing  him carried  off by  Orcs. Sam  tries to
 follow,  but  they  go  very  speedily.  The Ring  seems to  grow in
 power in this  region: he  sees clearly  in the  dark, and  seems to
 understand  the  orcs'  speech.  [He  fears  what  may happen  if he
 meets  a  Ringwraith  -  the  Ring  does  not  confer  courage: poor
 Sam  trembles  all the  time.](22) Sam  gathers that  they are  going to
 Minas  Morgul:  since they  are not  allowed to  leave their  post -
 but  a  messenger has  at once  been despatched  to announce  to the
 Dark  Lord  the  capture  of  Ringbearer,  and  to  bring  back  his
 orders.(23) 'The  Mighty  One  has  great  business  afoot,'  says one.
 'All  that  has  gone  before is  but a  skirmish compared  with the
 war that is  about to  be kindled.  Fine days,  fine days!  Blood on
 blade  and fire  on hill,  smoke in  sky and  tears on  earth. Merry
 weather, my friends, to bring in a real New Year!'                 

   The  Orcs  go  so  fast  that  Sam  soon  gets  weary  and  falls
 behind;  but  he  plods  on  behind  in  the  direction   of  Minas
 Morgul,  remembering  as  much  as  he  could  of  the   maps.  The
 path  led  up  into the  mountains -  the north  horn of  the Moun-
 tains  of  Shadow  that  sundered  the  ashen  vale   of  Gorgoroth
 from  the  valley  of  the  Great  River. Sam  looking out  saw all
 the  plain alive  with armies,  horse and  foot, black  plumes, red
 and black banners.  Countless hosts  of the  wild peoples  of Rhun,
 and the evil folk of  Harad, were  pouring out  of Kirith  Ungol to
 war.  Smoke  and  dust  afar off  suggested that  away in  the East
 more  were  coming.  [In  truth  they  were  -  far   beyond  Sam's
 eyesight  the  armies  rode   and  marched:   the  Dark   Lord  had
 determined  to  strike.  From  beyond  the  Inland  Sea of  Rhun up
 the  rivers  east  of  Mirkwood,  round  the  towers of  Dol Dughul
 they  poured  through  fen  and forest  to the  banks of  the Great
 River.  Lothlorien  was  lapped  in  flame.  From  the  Misty Moun-
 tains,  from  Moria  -  Khazaddum  and  many  hidden  caves  poured
 the  orcs  to  meet  them;  from  Harad and  from Mordor  they came
 against  Ondor,  and  sought  the  walls  of Minas-Tirith;  and out
 from  Isengard,  seeing  the  war-beacons   afar  off   blazing  in
 Mordor, came the traitor Saruman with many wolves.] (25)          
   Sam  comes  so  close  behind  that  he   sees  from   below  the
 orc-host entering the gates  of the  City (26)[struck  out: -  and they
 have not time to despoil Frodo].                                  
   At last Sam saw before  him the  walled city  that had  once been
 the City of the  Sun [>  Moon]: Minas  Anor [>  Ithil] in  the days
 of old (Elendil).(27) Amidst it stood a tall tower -  from afar  off it
 looked beautiful. But Sam  passed into  the city  and saw  that all
 was  defiled: and  on every  stone and  corner were  carved figures
 and faces and signs of  horror. Such  a dread  ran through  all the
 streets that he could hardly drag his legs or force himself along.
   'Where in all this devilish hole have they  put my  poor master,'
 thought  Sam.  He  feels  drawn to  the Tall  Tower. He  wanders up
 a  seemingly  endless  winding  stair,  windowless;   shrinks  into
 foul-smelling  recess[es]  when  snarling  Orcs go  up or  down. At
 the  top are  four locked  doors, North,  South, East,  West. Which
 is it? And anyway how can he get in: all are locked.              
   Suddenly  Sam  took  courage  and  did  a thing  of daring  - the
 longing  for  his  master  was  stronger  than all  other thoughts.
 He  sat  on  the  ground  and  began  to  sing.  Troll-song   -  or
 some  other  Hobbit  song  - or  possibly part  of the  Elves' song
 0 Elbereth. (Yes).                                                

   Cries  of anger  are heard  and guards  come from  stairs above
 and from below. 'Stop his mouth - the foul  hound' cry  the Orcs.
 'Would  that the  message would  return from  the Great  One, and
 we  could  begin  our Questioning  [or take  him to  Baraddur. He
 he! They have  a pretty  way there.  There is  One who  will soon
 find  out  where the  little cheat  has hid  his Ring.](28) Stop his
 mouth.'  'Careful!  '  cried the  captain, 'do  not use  too much
 strength ere word comes from the  Great One.'  By this  trick Sam
 found  the  door,  for  an Orc  unlocked the  East door  and went
 inside with  a whip.  'Hold your  foul tongue,'  he said,  as Sam
 heard the whip crack.                                           
   Swift as lightning Sam slipped  inside. He  longed to  stab the
 Orc but wisely restrained himself. In the light of [the  torch o]
 the small East  window he  saw Frodo  lying on  the bare  stone -
 his arms over his face  [?guarding] from  the whip  blow. Mutter-
 ing the orc went out and closed the door.                       
   Frodo groaned and turned over uncovering his face -  still pale
 from the poison. 'Why do dreams  cheat me?'  he said.  'I thought
 I heard a voice singing the song of Elbereth! '                 
   'You  were  not  dreaming!' said  Sam. 'It  is me,  master.' He
 drew off the Ring.                                              
   But Frodo felt a great hatred well up in his heart.  Before him
 there  stood  a small  orc, bowlegged,  leering at  him out  of a
 gloating face. It reminded him faintly  of some  one he  had once
 known  and  loved -  or hated.  He stood  up. 'Thief!'  he cried.
 'Give it to me.'                                                
   Sam  was  greatly  taken  aback:  and  stepped away,  so sudden
 and  grim  was  his  master's  face.  'The  poor  dear  is  still
 mithered,'(29) he thought.                                          
   'Surely, Master Frodo. I have come behind as  quick as  I could
 just for to give it you.'  And with  that he  gave the  ring into
 Frodo's  snatching  hand,  and  took  the  chain  from  about his
 neck. [Only for two days had he  been Ringbearer,  yet he  felt a
 curious regret as it left him.] (30)                            
   'Sam!  '  cried  Frodo.  'Sam!  my  dear old  Sam. How  did you
 come  here? I  thought' -  and then  he leant  upon Sam  and wept
 long. 'I thought,' he  said again  at last.  'Well never  mind. I
 thought I was lost and that they had taken the  Ring and  all was
 in ruin. How did you get it - tell me.'                         
   'Not by thieving,' said Sam with an effort at a smile.  'Or not
 exactly. I took it when I thought you were  gone, Master.  Yes, I
 thought  you  were  dead  for  certain away  back in  that Kirith

 place,  with  those  crawling  horrors.  That  was  a  black  hour,
 Master Frodo, but it seemed to me that  Sam had  got to  carry on
 - if he could.' Then he told the tale of the attack and how  he had
 followed. 'And it is in a place called Minas  Morgul that  we are,'
 he  said, 'and  not for  a small  mercy in  the Dark  Tower itself,
 leastways not yet. But Minas  whatever it  be: we  have got  to get
 out quick. And how, I don't see.'                                 
   They  talked  it  over  long  in  whispering  voices.  'The  Ring
 won't cover two,' said Sam;  'and I  think you  won't want  to part
 from  it  again.  Anyhow  the  Ring  is  yours, master,'  said Sam.
 'Once out of here you can  get away  fairly easy,  so long  as none
 of  the  Ring-wraiths  or  Black  Riders  turn  up,   or  something
 worse. There is some nasty eyes in  this town,  or the  pricking of
 my skin is merely the shivers  of a  cold coming  on. My  advice to
 you is to leg it as quick as may be.'                             
   'And you?' said Frodo.                                          
   '0,  me,'  said  Sam. 'That  can't be  helped. I  may find  a way
 out, or I may not. Anyway I have done the job I came to do.'      
   'Not yet, I think,' said Frodo. 'Not yet. I do not think  that we
 part here, dear friend.'                                          
   'Well then, master, tell me how.'                               
   'Let me think,' said Frodo. 'I have a plan,' he said at  last. 'A
 risk, but it may work. Have you still got your sword?'            
   'I have,' said Sam, 'and Sting too,  and your  glass of  light. I
 was  a-going  to  lay  them  by  you  under  the stones,'  he stam-
 mered,  'when  the  murdering  Orcs  came  on  us.  I  thought  you
 were dead - until you cried out as they gripped you.'             
   Frodo  smiled and  took back  his treasures.  He drew  Sting half
 from its sheath and the pale blue  light of  it flickered  from the
 blade.  'Not  surprising,'  he  said, 'that  Sting should  shine in
 Minas  Morgul!  Well  now,  Sam,  get  away  over  there   -  where
 you  will be  behind the  door when  it opens.  Draw your  sword. I
 will lie on the floor as I was. Then you can start your  song again
 - and that should bring in an orc soon  enough. Let  us hope  it is
 not many more than one.'                                          
   'But  the  whips,  master,  the murdering  hounds will  fetch you
 one for me, and I cannot abide it.'                               
   'You won't have to abide it if  you are  quick with  your sword,'
 said Frodo. 'But  you need  not worry!  They have  not had  time to
 search me - not  that Orcs  dare touch  the Ring  that is  for none
 less than servants of  the Ring  or for  Sauron himself.  They made
 sure that I had no sword and flung me on the floor. So I have

 still  my  mithril-coat.  That  lash you  heard as  you came  in was
 laid well across my  side and  back -  but I  don't think  you would
 find any weal.'                                                    
   Sam  was  much  relieved.  'Very  well,   what's  the   idea,  Mr.
 Frodo?' he asked.                                                  
   'You  must  do  your best  to kill  the Orc  that comes  in,' said
 Frodo. 'If  there is  more than  one I  must leap  up and  help, and
 maybe  we  shall  have  to try  and fight  our way  out. But  to get
 someone to come in seems our only way of getting out.'             
   Frodo  now  began again  to sing  0 Elbereth  (a few  lines). With
 an  oath  the door  was flung  open and  in strode  the orc-captain,
 cracking his lash. 'Lie quiet, you dog,' he shouted, and  raised his
 whip. But even as  he did  so, Sam  leapt from  behind the  door and
 stabbed  at  his throat.  He fell  with a  gurgle. Frodo  sprang up,
 pushed  the  door  gently  to,  and crouched  waiting for  any other
 orc  that  might  come. The  sound of  harsh voices  far off  up the
 further stairs came to them, but no other sounds.                  
   'Now's our chance,' said  Frodo. 'Get  into his  gear as  quick as
 you can.' Swiftly they  stripped the  orc, peeling  off his  coat of
 black  scale-like  mail,  unbuckling his  sword, and  unslinging the
 small round shield at his  back. The  black iron  cap was  too large
 for Sam (for orcs have large heads for their  size), but  he slipped
 on the mail. It  hung a  little loose  and long.  He cast  the black
 hooded  cloak  about  him,  took  the whip  and scimitar,  and slung
 the  red  shield. Then  they dragged  the body  behind the  door and
 crept out. Frodo went first.                                       
   It  was  dark  outside  when  the  door  was  shut   again.  Frodo
 took  out  the  glass  of  light.  They  hurried  down  the  stairs.
 Halfway   down   they   met   someone  coming   up  with   a  torch.
 Frodo  slipped  on  his  Ring  and drew  aside; but  Sam went  on to
 meet  the  goblin.  They  brushed  into one  another and  the goblin
 spoke  in  his  harsh  tongue;  but  Sam   answered  only   with  an
 angry   snarl.   That   seemed   satisfactory.  Sam   was  evidently
 mistaken  for  someone  important.  The  goblin  drew  aside  to let
 him pass,  and they  hastened on.  [Struck out:  They did  not guess
 that it was the messenger returning from Baraddur!]                
   Now   they   issued   from   the   Loathly   Tower.   Evening  was
 falling:  away  in  the  West over  the valley  of the  Anduin there
 was  some  light.  Far  away  loomed  the  Black  Mountains  and the
 tower  of Minas  Tirith, had  they known.  But in  the East  the sky
 was  dark,  with  black and  lowering clouds  that seemed  almost to
 rest  upon  the  land.  An  uneasy  twilight  lay  in   the  shadowy

 streets. Shrill  cries came  as it  were from  underground, strange
 shapes  flitted  by  or  peered out  of alley[s]  and holes  in the
 [?gaping]  houses;  there  were  [??dispirited]  voices  and  faint
 echoes  of  monotonous  and  unhappy  song.  All  the  carven faces
 leered, and their eyes glowed with a fire at great depth.         
   The  hobbits  shuddered  as  they  hurried  on.  Feet  seemed  to
 follow  them,  and  they  turned  many  corners,  but   they  never
 threw  them off.  Rustling and  pattering on  the stones  they came
 doggedly after them.                                              
   They  came  to  the  gates.  The  main gates  were closed;  but a
 small door was still open. Sentinels stood on  either side,  and at
 the  opening   stood  an   armed  warder,   gazing  out   into  the
 gathering  dusk.  The  Orcs  were  waiting  for the  messenger from
 Baraddur.                                                         
   'Stay  here,'  whispered  Frodo,  drawing  Sam  into a  shadow of
 a  pillar  just  before  the  gate. 'While  I wear  the Ring  I can
 understand much of their speech, or of  the thought  behind it  - I
 don't know  which. If  I cry  out come  at a  run, and  get through
 the door if you can.'                                             
   [The  following  was  struck  out  probably  as soon  as written:
 He  went  forward.  The  guard  at  the  open  door  was grumbling.
 'One  would  have  thought  we  had  caught  no  more than  a stray
 elf,' he said. 'Is [? the] Ringbearer [written above: Thief]  of no
 matter   to  them   at  the   Dark  Tower   now?  One   would  have
 thought  He would  have sent  a Rider  at least.  Not even  the war
 that is now set afoot  can surely  have lessened  the worth  of the
 One Treasure.'                                                    
   Suddenly  Frodo  stabbed  with  Sting.   The  warder   fell.  But
 Frodo leant against the door lest a guard should  thrust it  to and
 called  out.  The  sentinels sprang  up. Sam  came running,  but at
 first  they took  him for  a goblin  running up  to help.  He smote
 one  down  before  they  were  aware  of  his  enmity   and  sprang
 through the door]                                                 
   'Nay,' said Sam, 'that won't do. If we have a  fight at  the gate
 it  won't  be  much  use  getting  through.  We'll  have  the whole
 wasps'  nest a-buzzing  after us  before we  have gone  many yards:
 and  they  know  these  nasty  mountains as  well as  I mind  me of
 Bagend.  Swagger  is  the  only  hope,  Mr.  Frodo,   begging  your
 pardon.'                                                          
   'Very well, my good Sam,' said Frodo, 'try swagger.'            
   Feeling as little like 'swagger' as ever in his life,  Sam walked
 as  unconcernedly  as  he  could  manage  into  the  shadow  of the

 dark gateway.  The sentinels  on either  side looked  at him  and did
 not  move.  He   came  beside   the  warder   and  looked   out.  The
 warder started and looked at him angrily.                           
   Frodo  came  behind  warily.  He  saw  the  orc's  hand  go  to the
 hilt of  his scimitar.  'Who are  you and  who do  you think  you are
 pushing,' said he. 'Am I in  charge of  the gate  or not?'  Sam tried
 the trick  again. He  snarled angrily  and stepped  out of  the gate.
 But  the  trick  did  not  work  so  well a  second time.  The warder
 sprang after him and grabbed  at his  cloak. 'Closing  time is  [? by
 read  past  by?]  half  an  hour,' he  said, 'and  you know  that. No
 one  but  the  Lord's  messengers  are  allowed  in  or out,  and you
 know that well  enough. If  I have  any more  trouble I  shall report
 you  to  the  Captain  [struck  out:  of  Morgul].'  Sam  prepared to
 give  battle.  He turned  to face  the warder  gripping his  hilt and
 swung round his shield. It was  a red  shield, and  in the  midst was
 painted  a  single  black  eye.  The warder  fell back  nimbly. 'Your
 pardon,' he  said, '0  Captain of  Morgul. I  did not  recognize you.
 I  only  did  my  duty  as  I  thought.'  Sam, guessing  something of
 what  had  occurred,  snarled  again  and  waved  his  hand as  if in
 dismissal  and  walked  away  down  the  path  into  the   dusk.  The
 warder  stared  after  him shaking  his head.  He stood  blocking the
 door so that Frodo could not pass.                                  
   Sam  had  now  disappeared  on  the   downward  track,   and  still
 Frodo  waited  hoping  for  a  chance  to slip  out without  a fight,
 before  the  door  was  closed.  Suddenly  there  was  a  loud  boom.
 Dong  Dong  Dong.  A  big  bell  was  ringing  in the  Loathly Tower:
 the  alarm  was  sounded.   Frodo  heard   distant  cries.   Soon  he
 could  hear voices  calling: 'Close  the gates.  Ear the  door. Watch
 the walls. The Bearer has escaped from the Tower.'                  
   The  warder  seized  the  door  and  began to  close it.  Feet came
 running.  Frodo  took  the  only  chance.  Stooping  he   seized  the
 warder's  legs  and  threw  him  down and  sprang out.  As he  ran he
 heard  loud  shouts and  oaths. 'But  the Captain  is lying  dead and
 stripped in the Tower, I tell you,' he heard. 'Take that for  a fool.
 You have let  the bearer  escape. Take  that for  a fool.'  There was
 a  blow  and a  cry. Orcs  came pouring  out of  the gate,  and still
 the bell tolled.                                                    
   Suddenly  dark  overhead   a  black   shape  appeared   flying  low
 out of the east: a great bird it seemed, like an  eagle or  more like
 a  vulture. The  orcs halted  chattering shrilly:  but Frodo  did not
 wait.  He  guessed  that  some  urgent  message   concerning  himself
 had come from the Dark Tower.                                       

    Here the text in ink ends, but is followed by a few pencilled notes:
                                                                         
 Finds Sam                                                                
 They escape - and as they are actually making towards Mordor             
 this delays  hunt which  goes towards  the Anduin  North and             
 West.                                                                    
                             End of Chapter XXV.                          
                                 Gorgoroth.                               
 How Frodo came to the Fiery Mountain. See sketch (b) (c).                
                                                                         
  This last is a reference to the pages of the previous Plot, in  this book
 pp.  208  - 9,  from 'The  Gap of  Gorgoroth not  far from  Fire Mountain'
 to 'hurls himself and Gollum into the gulf?'                             
                                                                         
  All  this  story  of  the  escape  from Minas  Morgul was  developed from
 the brief words of the earlier Plot (p. 209):                            
                                                                         
   Sam  ...  passes  into  Morgol  and  finds Frodo.  Frodo feels  hatred of
   Sam  and  sees  him  as an  orc. But  suddenly the  orc speaks  and holds
   out  Ring  and  says:  Take it.  Then Frodo  sees it  is Sam.  They creep
   out.... Sam dresses up like an orc.                                    
                                                                         
 There  can  be no  doubt whatsoever  that the  text just  given, beginning
 as an outline in the present tense and  sliding almost  imperceptibly into
 full  narrative,  was  the actual  emergence on  paper of  what ultimately
 became  'The Tower  of Cirith  Ungol' in  The Return  of the  King (VI.1).
 It was written very fast (though surprisingly legibly), with  virtually no
 'correction  made  on  grounds of  suitability of  phrasing, and  gives an
 impression  of  uninterrupted  composition, perhaps  even at  one sitting.
 Being written at  this stage,(31) its relation  to the  ultimate form  of the
 story  in  'The  Tower  of  Cirith  Ungol'  is much  more remote  than has
 been  the  case  anywhere  else,  and although  certain new  elements (not
 present  in  the  previous  Plot)  now  enter  and  would  be  preserved -
 notably  Sam's  song,  instrumental in  his discovery  of where  Frodo was
 - the  story would  be radically  refashioned in  every point,  in geogra-
 phy, in motives, in  the structure  of events,  so as  to become  almost a
 new conception.                                                          
  Some  further  development  seems  in  fact  to  have  taken  place quite
 soon. Found with  this text  are some  other papers,  themselves all  of the
 same  time,  but  entirely  distinct  in appearance  and mode  of writing.
 Here  the story  of Frodo  and Sam  is roughly  outlined further,  and the
 escape  from  Minas  Morgul is  reconsidered and  rewritten. I  think that
 this further material belongs in fact  to the  same or  much the  same time
 as the primary text. There are  various pointers  to this.  The suggestion
 found  here  that  'it  could  be Merry  and Pippin  that had  adventure in
 Minas  Morgul  if  Treebeard  is  cut  out'  shows  that the  fully formed
 narrative  had  not  at  any  rate  advanced  beyond  the Breaking  of the
 Fellowship; and the chapter is still referred to  as 'XXV',  which carries

 the same implication  (i.e. my  father was  still assuming  the chapters
 'XXI - XXIV' as outlined on pp. 329  - 30  and had  not yet  embarked on
 the writing of the 'western' adventures).                               
   The text is written fairly legibly in ink, but towards the end becomes
 a pencilled scribble, here and there formidably difficult to make out.
                                                                        
                                 Ch. XXV.                               
                                                                        
   Minas    Morgul   must    be   made    more   horrible.    The   usual
 'goblin' stuff is not good enough here.                                 
   The   Gate   shaped   like   a   gaping   mouth   with  teeth   and  a
 window  like  an  eye  on  each  side.  As Sam  passes through  he feels
 a   horrible   shudder.(32) There   are  two   silent  shapes   sitting  on
 either side as sentinels.                                               
   Substitute something of the following sort for p. [337].              
                                                                        
   The  main  outer  gates  were  now  closed.  But   a  small   door  in
 the  middle  of  one  was   open.  (It   faced  south.)   The  tunnelled
 Gate-house  was  dark  as  night  and  the   pale  skylight   showed  up
 as  a  small  patch  at  the end  of a  tunnel. As  Sam and  Frodo crept
 closer   they  saw   or  guessed   the  great   ominous  shape   of  the
 Sentinels  on  either  side:  still sitting  soundless and  unmoved: but
 from them there seemed to issue a nameless threat.                      
   'Stay  here!'  whispered  Frodo  drawing  Sam   into  the   shadow  of
 a  wall  not  far  from  the  gate.  'While  I  wear  the  Ring,  I  can
 understand  much  of  the  speech  of  the  enemies,  or of  the thought
 behind  their  speech:  I  don't  know  which.  I  will go  forward, and
 try  and find  out something.  If I  call out,  come at  a run:  and get
 through the door if you can.'                                           
   'Nay!' said  Sam, 'that  won't do.  If we  have a  fight at  the gate,
 we  might  as  well  or  better  stay  inside.   We'd  have   the  whole
 wasps'  nest,  orcs  and  bogeys  and  all,  buzzing  after  us,  before
 we'd   gone   a   dozen   yards:   and   they   know    these   horrible
 mountains  as  well  as  I  mind  me  of  Bag-End.  Swagger is  the only
 hope, Mr. Frodo, begging your pardon.'                                  
   'Very well, my good Sam,' said Frodo, 'try swagger!'                  
   Feeling  as  little like  'swagger* as  ever in  his life,  Sam walked
 forward,  as  bold  and  unconcerned  as  he   could  manage   to  look,
 all  shaking  at  the  knees  as  he  was, and  with a  queer tightening
 of  his  breath.  Each  step forward  became more  difficult. It  was as
 if  some  will  denying  the  passage  was  drawn  like  invisible ropes
 across  his path.  He felt  the pressure  of unseen  eyes. It  seemed an
 age  before  he  passed  under  the  gloom  of the  gate's arch,  and he
 felt  tired  as  if  he  had been  swimming against  a strong  tide. The

 Sentinels  sat  there:  dark  and  still.  They  did  not   move  their
 clawlike  hands  laid  on  their   knees,  they   did  not   move  their
 shrouded  heads  [struck  out:  staring  stiffly]  in  which  no  faces
 could  be  seen;  but  Sam  felt  a  sudden  prickle  in  his  skin, he
 sensed  that  they  were  alive   and  suddenly   alert.  As   he  came
 between  them  he  seemed  to  shrink  [and]   shrivel,  naked   as  an
 insect  crawling  to  its  hole under  the eyes  of gigantic  birds. He
 came  to  the  open  door: just  outside the  path ran  to a  flight of
 stairs  leading  to   the  downward   road.  Only   one  step   and  he
 would be out -  but he  could not  pass: it  was as  if the  air before
 him  had  become  stiff.  He  had  to  summon   up  his   strength  and
 his will. Like lead he lifted his foot and forced it slowly bit  by bit
 over  the  threshold,  on  either side  he felt  the darkness  leer and
 grin  at  him.  Slowly  he  pressed  his  foot  down, down.  It touched
 the  step  outside:  and  then  something  seemed  to  snap.  He  stood
 fixed.  He  thought  he  heard  a  cry,  but  whether  just  beside him,
 or  far  away  in  some  remote  watchful  tower  he  could  not  tell.
 There  was  a  sudden  clash  of  iron.  An  Orc   ran  out   from  the
 guard-room.                                                           
    Frodo   creeping   warily   behind   was   now   also    under   the
 archway.  He  heard  the  guard  cry  out  in  harsh tones.  'Ho there:
 who  are  you,  and  what  do  you  think  you  are  doing?'   He  laid
 hold  of  Sam's  cloak.  Sam  snarled  angrily, but  the trick  did not
 work  so  well  a  second  time.  The  guard  held  him.  'Closing-time
 is  past,  half  an  hour  ago,'  he  growled. 'No  one but  the Lord's
 messengers  are  allowed  in  or  out,  and  you  know  that.  The door
 awaits  the  bringer  of  word  from Baraddur,  but it  is not  for any
 other.'                                                               
    Of  all  this  Sam  understood  only  that   he  was   forbidden  to
 pass.  He  could  not  move  forward:  so  he  stepped   suddenly  back
 stepping  on  the  feet  of  the  Orc  behind.  Frodo  saw  the guard's
 hand  go  to  the  hilt  of his  scimitar. 'Hey,  who are  you stamping
 on?' said he. Sam prepared for battle. He turned, etc. as before.     
                                                                      
    [Struck out: An alternative would be to make the gate              
 impassable. The alarm is sounded. The City is aroused. The            
 Vulture  {Black  Rider)  arrives  in  the  main  square. Frodo  at once
 , knows that Ring is useless. He feels almost discovered. Messen-     
 ger says Ring is still in the town: he feels it.]                     
                                                                      
                         Alternative account.                          
                                                                      
    Make light fade in the window as Sam and Frodo talk in the         

 Sketch for the Gate of Minas Morgul.

 Loathly  Tower.  They  try the  trick of  getting an  orc to  open the
 door  as  twilight  deepens.  No  dressing  up.  They creep  out into
 the  town.  Something  warns  Frodo   not  to   use  the   Ring.  The
 elf-hoods prove better in the City of  Sorcery than  the Ring  - the
 two hobbits  (aided  by  some  grace  of  Galadriel  that  went  with
 the garments) pass along the streets  like mist.  The gate  is closed
 - the sentinels described: three a side.(33)                        
   The  walls  are  high  and  if it  were possible  to get  onto them
 unseen - it is  not: the  few ascents  are guarded  - they  could not
 get down. They are trapped.                                         
   A  cry  from  a  watch  tower.  The  waning moon  rises in  East. A
 dark shape  flying out  of the  East, a  black speck  against clouds.
 Vulture   bearing   a   Ringwraith  settles   in  main   square.  The
 Ringwraith  has  come  to  take  Frodo  back  to  the Dark  Tower. At
 that  moment  boom,  the  alarm  is   sounded  from   Loathly  Tower.
 Ringwraith says Ring has not left City:  he feels  it. Hunt  in town.
 Hairbreadth  escape of  hobbits. In  spite of  the Ringwraith  a host
 of  orcs  assemble  to  scour  mountains  (? Frodo  and Sam  trap two
 orcs in an alley and take their cloaks and gear. ?) Pass out  in rear
 of  the  company.  Describe  the  reluctant  feeling,   and  moveless
 sentinels. Even as they  pass the  sentinels stir:  and give  a fell,
 horrible,  far-off  cry.  The  moon  is  suddenly  clouded.  A fierce
 cold  wind  from  East.  Rain?  The  hobbits  fling  themselves  flat
 among   the   rocks.   Orcs   pass  over   them.  Hunt   misses  them
 because   they   go   towards   Mordor.  The   hunt  goes   West  and
 North.                                                              
   Now   go   on   to   describe  the   journey  to   Fiery  Mountain.
 Footsteps come after them. Gollum has picked up trail.              
   Frodo  and  Sam  journey  by  night  down   the  slopes   of  Duath
 out into the dreadful waste of Gorgoroth.(34)                       
   [The  grey  cloaks  of  Lothlorien  must   be  made   more  magical
 and  efficacious.  'Are  these  garments  magical?'  asks  Frodo. 'We
 do  not  know  what  you  mean  by  magical,'  said they.  'They have
 virtues:  for  they  are  elvish.'  They were  green and  grey: their
 property  is  to  blend  perfectly  with  all  natural  surroundings:
 leaves, boughs, grass, water, stone. Unless a full  light of  sun was
 on  them, and  the wearer  was moving  or set  against the  sky, they
 were not invisible, but unnoticeable.](35)                          
   Far  away  they  saw  the  underside   of  the   Mountains  stained
 red   with  the   glow  of   Amarthon  [written   above:  Dolamarth]:
 Mount   Doom:   the   Mountain   of   Fire.(36) There  is   a  constant
 rumble  of  thunder.  Frodo  feels  the  Eye.  They  come down  a long

 ravine  opening  onto  Gorgoroth  beyond  the  south-east   end  of
 Kirith Ungol: it is end of road from Barad-dur to Morgul.(37)      
 Great  hideous  cavern (38) pillars.  They  peer  [?out?about]  in  the
 grey  day  over  Gorgoroth.  Mount  Doom  is  smoking  and  burning
 to left. Black cloud lies over Baraddur. Millions of birds  - [?led
 by  vultures]: plain  seems crawling  with insects  - a  great host
 assembled  -  all  sweeping  out  towards  Kirith.  By  evening all
 plain is silent and empty. Cinders fall on plain. Moon  rises late.
 Very dark. They begin  the perilous  crossing. Rustle  of following
 feet. Journey all night.                                           
   Distances are rather too large - it would be  eased if  Orcs took
 Frodo  to  [?East]   Guard  Tower   of  R...   -  Loath   and  Grim
 [written above: Fell  and Dire].  They could  then see  easier the
 host and would not have to cross Kirith Ungol.(39)                 
   [Struck  out: It  could be  Merry and  Pippin that  had adventure
 in Minas Morgul if Treebeard is cut out.] (40)                     
   From  Dire-castle  Gorgos  (and  Nargos)  it  would  be  only  70
 miles. They could creep round edge of Eredlithui.(41)              
   Sam  must  fall  out somehow.  Stumble and  break leg:  thinks it
 is  a  crack  in ground  - really  Gollum. [?Makes ?Make]  Frodo go
 on alone.                                                          
   Frodo  toils  up  Mount Doom.  Earth quakes,  the ground  is hot.
 There  is a  narrow path  winding up.  Three fissures.  Near summit
 there is Sauron's Fire-well. An opening in  side of  mountain leads
 into a chamber the floor of which is split asunder by a cleft.(42) 
   Frodo  turns  and  looks  North-west,  sees  the dust  of battle.
 Faint  sound  of  horn.  This  is  Windbeam  the  Horn  of  Elendil
 blown only in extremity.(43)                                       
   Birds circle over. Feet behind.                                  
   It  is  then  at  night before  ascent of  Mount Doom  that Frodo
 sees  the  lone  eye,  like  a window  that does  not move  and yet
 searches in Baraddur.                                              
   Description of Baraddur seen afar.                               
                                                                   
   I give here the latter part of a time-scheme of this period which
 covers  the  events  of  this  outline  plot.  For  the chronologi-
 cal structure in this scheme see p. 367 ('scheme I').              
                                                                   
   Dec. 25. Reach Tolbrandir in evening.                             
        26. Flight of Frodo.                                         
     Jan.3. Gollum slips away.                                      
         5. Frodo, Sam [struck out: and Gollum] reach Kirith Ungol.
         6. Frodo captured.                                          
         8. Sam rescues Frodo in [Minas Morgul >] Gorgos.            

   9. Sam and Frodo journey in Duath.                                 
  10. Sam and Frodo see host in Gorgoroth and lie hid.                
       [These two entries changed to read: Jan. 9, 10, 11 Sam        
       and Frodo journey in Eredlithui (see hosts going to war).]
  12,13. Ascent of Mount Doom.                                       
  14. [?Horns)... Fall of Mordor.                                     
  15. Victory and return to Minas Tirith.                             
       [Added: Jan. 25 Reach Minas Tirith. Jan. 26 Great Feast.]     
                                                                    
 Notable  points  in this  time-scheme are  the corroboration  of the
 statement in the text that Sam had been Ringbearer for two days (see
 p. 334 and note 30); the change in the place of Frodo's imprisonment
 from Minas Morgul to Gorgos (see p. 344 and notes  39, 41);  and the
 mention of the great feast that followed the victory (cf. p. 212).

                             NOTES.                                       
                                                                         
 1. On  the  back  of  the  first  page  of  this  outline  are  some rough
    workings  for  revision  of  The  Lay  of  Aotrou  and   Itroun,  which
    was  completed  in  its  original  form  in   1930.  This   stray  page
    perhaps  shows  my  father turning  to it  again at  this time.  It was
    ultimately  published  in   greatly  revised   form,  to   which  these
    workings were moving, in 1945.                                        
 2. Cf. the  outline (c)  for 'Farewell  to Lorien',  p. 269:  'Arrows from
    East shore as they pass down river?'                                  
 3. Tolharn  and   Tollernen  were   passing  replacements   of  Tolondren.
    Subsequently  Stoneait  (ait  'islet',  =  eyot)  and   Tollernen  were
    struck  out  in  pencil  (all  other  changes  in  the  opening section
    being  made  in  ink)  and  replaced  by  Eregon  ( =  Stone pinnacle).
    On Eregon see p. 323 note 12.                                         
 4. Sarn   Gebir   and   Nomen's   land   (Nomenlands)   emerged   in   the
    course of the writing of 'Farewell to Lorien' (pp. 281, 283).         
 5. It is ill to be alone  on the  east side  of the  River: this  was left
    unchanged  when  the   text  immediately   preceding  was   altered  to
    the  story  that  Frodo  and Sam  did not  cross to  the east  bank but
    climbed the hill  on the  island where  they camped.  - In  the outline
    (c) to 'Farewell to Lorien' (p. 269) it is told that 'They'  crossed to
    the  east  bank  and went  up into  the hills  'to look  around', where
    'They' may be the whole Company or Frodo and Sam only.                
 6. Eredwethion    'Mountains    of   Shadow'    is   derived    from   The
    Silmarillion.                                                         
    With this scene compare the previous Plot (p. 208):                   
       Boromir  takes  Frodo  apart  and  talks  to him.  Begs to  see Ring
                                                                         
       again. Evil enters into his heart and he tries to daunt Frodo and

       then to take it by force. Frodo is obliged  to slip  it on  to escape
       him.  (What  does  he  see  then  -  cloud  all  round   him  getting
       nearer and many fell voices in air?)                                 
                                                                           
     In  that  Plot  there  is  no mention  of the  Eye -  but cf.  the much
     earlier  outline  dated  August  1939  (VI.381):  'Horrible  feeling of
     an Eye searching for him'.                                             
  8. On the name Dantruinel for Rauros see pp. 285, 316.                    
  9. It seems very likely that the reason for shifting  the place  where the
     Company  camped  to  the  west  bank  of  the  river  and   making  the
     island  inaccessible  was  to   allow  Merry   and  Pippin   to  become
     separated   and   lost   -   a  development   that  had   already  been
     conceived in the previous Plot (see note 16).                          
 10. I  take  these  words,  set  in  inverted  commas,  to   be  Boromir's,
     referring deceitfully to Frodo's having put on the Ring.               
 11. The  account  of  Sam's  tracking  of Frodo  that follows  is developed
     from that in the previous Plot (p. 208):                               
         The  search. Sam  is lost.  He tries  to track  Frodo and  comes on
     Gollum. He follows Gollum and Gollum leads him to Frodo.               
         Frodo  hears  following  feet.   And  flies.   But  Sam   comes  up
     too  to  his  surprise.  The  two  are  too  much  for  Gollum.  Gollum
     is  daunted  by  Frodo  -   who  has   a  power   over  him   as  Ring-
     bearer....                                                             
         Gollum  pleads  for  forgiveness  and  feigns  reform.   They  make
     him lead them through the Dead Marshes.                                
 12. Sam  is  now  on  the  east  side  of  Anduin,  and the  boat 'knocking
     against the bank' is the boat in which Frodo has crossed.              
 13. This  paragraph  ('Gollum  was  so intent  on the  trail...') evidently
     replaced  the  story  that  preceded,  although  that  was  not  struck
                                                                           
     OUT.                                                                   
                                                                           
 14. Kirith  Ungol  was  at this  time the  name of  the great  pass leading
     into  Mordor  in  the  North-west  (pp.  283,  285,  and  Map   III  on
     p. 309).                                                               
 15. At some time later my father struck it all out and wrote in pencil:
       Steep place  where Frodo  has to  climb a  precipice. Sam  goes first
     so  that  if  Frodo  falls  he  will  knock  Sam  down first.  They see
     Gollum come down by moonlight like a fly.                              
     This  is  where  the  story  in The  Two Towers  (IV.1, 'The  Taming of
     Smeagol', p. 219) first appears.                                       
 16. Cf.  the  previous  Plot, p.  210. It  is seen  from the  synopsis that
     immediately  follows  (pp.  329  -  30)  of  the  chapter  telling what
     happened  to  Merry  and  Pippin  that  my  father  had  still  no idea
     that anything more untoward had happened to them.                      
 17. This  passage  remains  virtually  unchanged  in  substance   from  the
     previous Plot (p. 211).                                                
 18. At  a  later  stage  my  father  pencilled  in various  developments to
     Chapters  XXII  and  XXIII  (as  renumbered).   The  synopsis   of  the

           former  he  altered  thus:  'Black  orcs  of Misty  Mountains capture
           Merry  and  Pippin,  bear  them  to  Isengard.   But  the   orcs  are
           attacked  by  the  Rohiroth  on  borders  of  Fangorn,  and   in  the
           confusion  Merry  and  Pippin  escape  unnoticed.'  Also  added  here
           was 'Trotter is led astray by [? finding] orc-prints. He  follows the
           orcs  believing  Frodo,  Sam,  etc. captured.  He meets  Gandalf.' To
           'What  happened  to  Gimli   and  Legolas'   he  added:   'Went  with
           Trotter to rescue Merry and Pippin.'                                 
      19.  Noted beside this sentence: s G - F asleep. F G - s asleep.  s F  - c
           asleep.                                                              
      20.  The origin of  this passage  is seen  in the  earlier Plot  (p. 209):
           'There is a ravine, a spiders' glen, they have to pass at entrance to
           Gorgoroth.  Gollum  gets  spiders  to  put spell  of sleep  on Frodo.
           Sam  drives  them off.  But cannot  wake him.'  Kirith Ungol  was not
           yet  its  name  when  that  was  written:  there  is mention  in that
           outline  of  the  Gap  of  Gorgoroth, clearly  the pass  leading into
           Mordor (pp. 208, 213), but  the words  'a ravine  they have  to pass'
           perhaps suggest  that the  'spiders' glen'  led off  the Gap.  In the
           present Plot, however, Kirith Ungol, ravine of  spiders, is  the pass
           itself.                                                              
      21.  It  was  no  doubt  put  in  when  the story  had gone  somewhat past
           this point, since it is avowedly  narrative in  form and  not outline
           (present tense).                                                     
      22.  This sentence is enclosed in square brackets in the original.        
      23.  At  the  top of  the page  is written:  'All Sauron's  folk, however,
           know that if Ringbearer is taken he is to be  guarded as  their life,
           but  otherwise  to   be  untouched   and  undespoiled,   and  brought
           intact to the Lord.' This was struck out.                            
      24.  On the Sea of Rhun or Rhunaer see p. 307.                            
      25.  This passage is enclosed in square brackets in the original.         
      26.  For  the  site  of  Minas  Morgul  see Map  III on  p. 309.  The Orcs
           appear to have come from  there, in  view of  'Sam gathers  that they
           are  going  to  Minas  Morgul: since  they are  not allowed  to leave
           their post'; and 'the path led up into  the mountains'  suggests that
           the  way  to  Minas  Morgul  was by  a track  leading upwards  out of
           Kirith  Ungol;  hence  Sam sees  'from below'  the Orcs  entering the
           City.                                                                
      27.  Unless my father had decided  to restore  the original  conception of
           Minas  Anor  in  the  East  becoming  Minas  Morgul, and  Minas Ithil
           in  the  West   becoming  Minas   Tirith,  which   seems  exceedingly
           improbable,  this  can  only  be  a   momentary  confusion.   But  it
           occurs again: p. 366 note 19.                                        
      28.  This  passage  is  enclosed  in  square  brackets  in  the  original.
      29.  mithered:  'confused,   bewildered'.  My   father  often   used  this
           English  dialect  word,  though  as  I recollect  always in  the form
           moithered;   but   mithered  is   recorded  from   Staffordshire  and
                                                                               
                                                                              

                                                      
                                                                         
      Warwickshire  and   the  neighbouring   counties  of   the.  English
      midlands.                                                           
  30. This sentence is enclosed in  square brackets  in the  original. Two
      days  seems a  very long  time to  have elapsed  since Sam  took the
      Ring  from  Frodo  in  Kirith Ungol,  and is  by no  means suggested
      in  the narrative;  on the  other hand,  on Map  III (p.  309) Minas
      Morgul  was  at  least  30  miles  from  the  eastern  edge  of  the
      Mountains  of  Shadow  at  Kirith  Ungol. See  also the  time scheme
      on pp. 344 - 5.                                                     
  31. It should be emphasized that the fact of its  being written  at this
      stage in the history of The  Lord of  the Rings,  and not  later, is
      clear and certain.                                                  
  32. This refers of course to Sam's entry into Minas Morgul, alone.      
  33. Cf.  'The  Tower  of  Cirith  Ungol'  in  The  Return  of  the King,
      p.  178: 'They  were like  great figures  seated upon  thrones. Each
      had  three  joined  bodies,  and  three  heads  facing  outward, and
      inward, and  across the  gateway. The  heads had  vulture-faces, and
      on  their  great  knees  were  laid  clawlike  hands.'  -  A  little
      diagrammatic sketch is included in the manuscript at this point:
                                                                         
                                                           
                                                                         
  34. Duath  (replacing  Eredwethion,  p.   325)  is   the  name   of  the
      Mountains  of  Shadow  on  the  First  Map  and  on  my map  made in
      1943;   my   father   added   Ephel  before   Duath  on   both  maps
      subsequently (pp. 309 - 10). -  The sentence  was changed  in pencil
      to  read:  'Frodo  and  Sam journey  by night  among the  slopes and
      ravines N. of Duath towards the dreadful waste of Gorgoroth.'       
  35. The brackets are in the original. This notable passage is the origin
      of  the  much  enlarged  description  of  the  cloaks  of Lothlorien
      which first appears as an addition to the fair copy of  'Farewell to
      Lorien' (p. 285), though expressed  in a  wholly different  way. The
      question 'Are  these garments  magical?', here  asked by  Frodo, was
      then given to Merry, and finally (FR p. 386)  to Pippin  ('Are these
      magic cloaks?').                                                    
  36. The  first  devising  of  an  elvish  name  for  Mount  Doom  (later
      Amon Amarth).                                                       
  37. My  father  first  wrote  here:  'They  come  down  a   long  ravine
      opening  on  Kirith  Un(gol)', striking  out this  name at  once and
      writing  instead 'opening  onto Gorgoroth',  etc. It  is hard  to be
      sure, but it seems likely that he saw  a path  climbing up  to Minas
      Morgul  out  of  Kirith  Ungol  (the  pass  into  Mordor),  by which
      Frodo  was  taken,  and  another  more  southerly  approach,  a road
      running  westwards  from  the  Dark  Tower  and  climbing  to  Minas

       Morgul  by  the  'long  ravine'  down  which   Sam  and   Frodo  made
       their escape (see Map III, p. 309).                                  
  38.  This word is clearly written cavern, not carven.                     
  39.  This short paragraph  is very  hard to  read and  not easy  to inter-
       pret, but at least it is clear that here is the first suggestion of a
       doubt  that  it  was  to  Minas  Morgul  that  Frodo  was  taken. The
       word I have given as East begins  Ea but  does not  look at  all like
       East; yet that seems appropriate to the sense (see further  note 41).
       The  name  of  the  tower  might  be  Rame  or  Raine,   among  other
       possibilities.  The  words  'They  would  not  have  to  cross Kirith
       Ungol' are at first sight puzzling, since it has just been  said that
       they  emerged  from  the long  ravine 'beyond  the south-east  end of
       Kirith  Ungol';  but I  think that  my father  meant that  they would
       not  have  to  cross  the  open  plain   between  the   Mountains  of
       Shadow  and  the  Ash  Mountains  (Ered  Lithui),  whether   this  be
       called Kirith Ungol or Gorgoroth at that point.                      
  40.  See  p.  339; and  for an  earlier suggestion  that Merry  and Pippin
       might find themselves in Mordor see p. 211.                          
  41.  On  the  First  Map there  are two  small circles  on either  side of
       Kirith  Ungol  (on  my redrawing,  square P  15 on  Map II,  p. 305).
       These  reappear  on  my  1943  map  as two  small towers.  On neither
       map  are  they  named;  but  it  seems  clear  that they  represent a
       western  and  an  eastern  guard  tower   -  presumably   the  Nargos
       and  Gorgos  named  here   (cf.  'There   are  Orc   guard-towers  on
       either  side  of  Gorgoroth',  p. 208).  The words  'From Dire-castle
       Gorgos  (and  Nargos)  it  would  be  only 70  miles' mean,  I think,
       'From  the  eastern tower  Gorgos (and  for the  matter of  that from
       the  western  tower  Nargos  also)  it  was  only  70 miles  to Mount
       Doom.'                                                               
  42.  The three fissures and Sauron's well  of fire  appear in  the earlier
       Plot (p. 209), but this is the first glimpse of the Sammath Naur.
  43.  Windbeam:  if  this  name  occurs elsewhere  in my  father's writings
       I have not found it, except in the Last  Letter of  Father Christmas,
       where he calls it the Great Horn,  and says  that he  has not  had to
       blow it for over four hundred  years (cf.  'only in  extremity' here)
       and  that its  sound carries  as far  as the  North Wind  blows. (Cf.
       Old English beme (beam) 'trumpet'.)                                 

                                    XVII.                                  
                               THE GREAT RIVER.                             
                                                                           
 It  has  been seen  (pp. 324,  330) that  having written  an outline  of the
 story  from  the   departure  from   Lorien  to   the  'Scattering   of  the
 Company' at  'Tollernen' my  father decided  that the  first element  in the
 outline,  'The  Company  sets  off  from  Tongue', should  in fact  form the
 conclusion  to  Chapter  XX  ('Farewell  to  Lorien'),  and XXI  should take
 up with 'They are attacked with arrows'.                                   
  As  I have  mentioned (p.  283), the  original draft  for the  last section
 of  'Farewell  to  Lorien'  (i.e. 'The  Company sets  off from  Tongue') was
 written in ink in a clear script with little hesitation. That  draft section
 ends  with  the  words  'End  of   Ch.  XX',   showing  that   the  chapter-
 arrangement  just  referred  to  had  already  been devised.  The character-
 istic very pale ink used for this section was  also used  for the  text 'The
 Story  Foreseen  from  Lorien' and  for the  first part  of the  new chapter
 XXI: the  three texts  have a  strong general  likeness, and  were obviously
 written at the same time.                                                  
  The  draft  of  the  last  section  of  'Farewell  to Lorien'  ends halfway
 down   a   page,  and   is  followed   by  'XXI:   The  Scattering   of  the
 Company';  at  this  stage  my  father assumed  that the  narrative outlined
 on pp. 324 - 8, 329 (i.e. excluding the  story of  Sam's tracking  of Frodo)
 would  constitute  a  single  chapter.  For  the journey  down the  River to
 'Tollernen'  he  had  set  down  no  more  in  the way  of event  than 'They
 are  attacked  with  arrows.'  I  give  now  the  opening  draft of  the new
 chapter as it was first written.(1)                                        
                                                                           
  Sam  woke  him.  He  was  lying  in  a bed  of blankets  and furs         
 under tall grey-stemmed  trees near  the river  bank. The  grey of         
 morning  was  dim  among  the  bare   branches.  Gimli   was  busy         
 with a small fire near at hand. He  had slept  the first  night of         
 their river journey away. They  started again  before the  day was         
 broad.  Not  that  most  of  the  Company  were  eager   to  hurry         
 southwards:  they  were  content  that  the  decision  which  they         
 must  make  when  they  came  to  Rauros  and  the Isle  of Eregon (2)     
 lay  yet some  days ahead,  and still  less did  they wish  to run         
 swiftly into the perils that certainly lay beyond, whatever course         
 they took,  but Trotter  felt that  the time  was urgent  and that         
 willing or not they should hasten forward.                                 

                                                                
                                                                  
   As the  second day  of their  voyage wore  on the  lands changed
 slowly: trees thinned and then failed: on the  East bank  to their
 left,  long  formless  slopes  stretched up  and away  towards the
 sky; brown they looked as if a fire had passed over  them, leaving
 no  living  thing  of green;  an unfriendly  waste without  even a
 withered tree or a bold stone  to break  the emptiness.  They were
 come to the  Brown Lands,  the Withered  Wold that  lay in  a vast
 desolation  between  Dol  Dughul  in  Southern  Mirkwood  and  the
 hills of Sarn-Gebir: what pestilence of  war or  fell deed  of the
 Lord  of  Mordor  had  so  blasted  all that  region they  did not
 know.(3) Upon  the west  bank to  their right  the land  was treeless
 and quite flat, but green: there  were forests  of reeds  of great
 height in places that shut out the view as  the little  boats went
 rustling  by along  their fluttering  borders: the  great withered
 flowering heads bent  in the  light cold  airs hissing  softly and
 waving like funeral  plumes. Here  and there  in open  spaces they
 could see across the wide rolling meads hills far away, or  on the
 edge of sight a dark line where still the southernmost  phalanx of
 the Misty Mountains marched.                                      
   'You are looking  out across  the great  pastures of  Rohan, the
 Riddermark,  land  of  the  Horsemasters,'  said Trotter;  'but in
 these evil days they do not dwell nigh the river or ride  often to
 its shores. Anduin is wide, yet the orc-bows will with  ease shoot
 an arrow across the stream.'                                      
   The hobbits looked  from bank  to bank  uneasily. If  before the
 trees had  seemed hostile,  as if  harbouring secret  dangers, now
 they felt that they were too naked: afloat in little open boats in
 the midst of wide bare land, on a river that  was the  boundary of
 war. As they went  on the  feeling of  insecurity grew  upon them.
 The  river  broadened and  grew shallow:  bleak stony  beaches lay
 upon the  east, there  were gravel  shoals in  the water  and they
 had  to  steer  carefully.  The Brownlands  rose into  bleak wolds
 over which flowed a chill air from the East.  Upon the  other side
 the  meads  had become  low rolling  downs of  grey grass,  a land
 of  fen  and  tussock.  They  shivered thinking  of the  lawns and
 fountains, the clear sun and gentle rain of Lothlorien:  there was
 little  speech  and  no laughter  among them.  Each was  busy with
 his  own  thoughts.  Sam  had  long  since made  up his  mind that
 though  boats  were  maybe  not  as  dangerous  as  he   had  been
 brought  up  to  believe,  they  were  far more  uncomfortable. He
 was  cramped  and  miserable, having  nothing to  do but  stare at
 the winter  lands crawling  by and  the dark  grey water,  for the

 Company  used  the  paddles mainly  for steering,  and in  any case
 they  would  not  have  trusted  Sam  with  a  paddle.   Merry  and
 Pippin  in  the  middle  boat  were  ill at  ease. [Added  and then
 struck  out:  Merry  was at  the stern,  facing Sam  and steering.]
 Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails  as if
 some  restlessness  or  doubt  consumed him.  Often Pippin  who sat
 in the prow, looking back,  caught a  queer gleam  in his  eye when
 he peered forward gazing at the boat in front where Frodo sat.
   So the time passed until the end  of the  sixth [>  seventh] day.
 The banks were still bare, but on  both sides  on the  slopes above
 them  bushes  were  scattered,  behind  and  further  south  ridges
 with twisted fir-trees could  be glimpsed:  they were  drawing near
 the  grey  hill  country  of  Sarn-Gebir:  the  southern  border of
 Wilderland,   beyond  which   lay  the   Nomanland  and   the  foul
 marshes  that lay  for many  leagues before  the passes  of Mordor.
 High in the air there were flocks of dark birds. Trotter  looked at
 them with disquiet.                                               
   'I fear  we have  been too  slow and  overbold,' he  said. 'Maybe
 we have come too  far by  day, and  ere this  we should  have taken
 to  journeying  between  dusk  and  dawn  and  lain  hidden  in the
 day.'                                                             
   He stayed  his boat  with his  paddle, and  when the  others came
 up he spoke to them, counselling that  they should  go on  into the
 night, and put off their rest until night was old  and dawn  was at
 hand.  'And  if we  make another  two or  three leagues,'  said he,
 'we  shall  come,  if I  am right  in my  memories, to  Sarn Gebir,
 where the  river begins  to run  in deep  channels: there  maybe we
 shall find better shelter and more secrecy.'                      
   Already  twilight was  about them.  The hobbits  at any  rate had
 been hoping soon for the warmth of a fire to  their cold  feet, and
 the feel of solid  earth beneath  them. But  there seemed  no place
 in that houseless country which invited  them to  halt; and  a cold
 drowsiness   was   on   them,   numbing   thought.  They   made  no
 answer, yes or no. Trotter drove his  paddle in  the water  and led
 them  on  again.  [Added:  The  stars  leapt  out  above.  The  sky
 [was] clear and cold. It was  nearly night  when](4) Just  ahead there
 loomed up rocks  in the  midst of  the stream,  nearer to  the west
 bank. To the  east there  was a  wider channel,  and that  way they
 turned: but they found the current  swift. In  the dusk  they could
 see pale foam and water beating  against the  rocks upon  the right
 hand.                                                             
   'This is an evil time  of day  to pass  through such  a dangerous

 reach,'  said  Boromir.  'Hey  Trotter,' he  cried, cupping  his hands
 and calling  above the  noise of  the waters  to the  boat ahead  - it
 was already too dark  to see  whether it  was far  or near.  'Hey!' he
 called. 'Not this way tonight!'                                      
   'No  indeed,'  said Trotter,  and they  saw that  he had  turned his
 boat  and  had  come  back  almost  alongside  without   their  seeing
 him.  'No:  I  did  not  know  we  had  come  so  far yet:  the Anduin
 flows  faster  than  I  reckoned.  The  rapids  of Pensarn (5) are ahead.
 They  are  not  very  long  nor  very  fierce,  yet  too  dangerous to
 venture  on in  the dark  for those  who know  the Great  River little
 or only from tales. See,'  he said,  'the current  has flung  us right
 over to the east shore: in a little we shall be on the shoals.  Let us
 turn and go back to the western side, above the rocks.'              
   Even  as  he  spoke  there  was  a  twanging,  and  arrows  whistled
 over  and  among  them.   One  smote   Frodo  between   the  shoulders
 but  fell  back, foiled  by the  hidden coat  of mail;  another passed
 through  Trotter's  hair; and  a third  stood fast  in the  gunwale of
 the middle boat close by Merry's hand.                               
   'To  the  west   bank!'  shouted   Boromir  and   Trotter  together.
 They  leaned  forward  straining  at  the  paddles  -  even   Sam  now
 took  a  hand,  but  it  was  not  so  easy.  The current  was flowing
 strong.  Each  one  expected  at  any minute  to feel  the sting  of a
 blackfeathered   orc-arrow.   But   it  was   now  grown   very  dark,
 dark even  for the  keen night-eyes  of goblins;  goblins were  on the
 bank,  they  did  not  doubt.  When  they  had  come   into  midstream
 as far as they could judge,  and out  of the  swirl of  waters running
 into  the  narrow  channel,   Legolas  laid   down  his   paddle,  and
 lifting  the  bow  he  had   brought  from   Lorien  strung   it,  and
 turned,  peering  back  into  the  gloom.   Across  the   water  there
 came  shrill  cries;  but  he  could  see  nothing.  The   enemy  were
 shooting  wildly  now  and  few  arrows  came near  the boats:  it was
 grown  very  dark:  there  was  not even  a grey  glimmer on  the face
 of the  river, only  here and  there the  broken twinkle  reflecting a
 misty star.                                                          
   As  he  gazed  into  the  blackness  away  east  the   clouds  broke
 and  the  white  rind  of  the  new  moon  appeared  riding  slowly up
 the  sky;  [but its  faint light  did little  to illumine  the further
 shore.](6) Sam  looked  up  at  it  in wonder.(7) Even  as  he  did  so a
 dark shape,  like a  cloud yet  not a  cloud, low  and ominous,  for a
 moment  shut  off  the  thin  crescent  and  winged  its  way  towards
 them, until  it appeared  as a  great winged  shape black  against the
 dark  heaven.(8) Fierce voices  greeted  it  from  across   the  water.

 Frodo felt a sudden chill  about his  heart, and  a cold  like the
 memory  of  an  old  wound in  his shoulder:  he crouched  down in
 the boat.                                                         
   Suddenly  the  great  bow  of  Legolas sang.  He heard  an arrow
 whistle/whine.  He  looked  up.  The  winged shape  swerved: there
 was a harsh croaking  cry and  it seemed  to fall,  vanishing down
 into  the  darkness  of the  eastern shore;  the sky  seemed clean
 again.  They  heard  a  tumult  as  of  many voices  murmuring and
 lamenting  [written  above:  cursing], and  then silence.  No more
 arrows came towards them.                                         
   'Praised be the bow of Galadriel and the  keen eye  of Legolas!'
 said Gimli. 'That was a mighty shot in the dark.'                 
   'But what it hit who can say,' said Boromir.                    
   'I cannot,' said Gimli. 'Yet I liked that shape as little as the
 shadow of the Balrog of Moria.'                                   
   'It was not a Balrog,' said Frodo, still shivering. 'I  think it
 was...' He did not finish.                                        
   'You think what?' asked Boromir quickly.                        
   'I do not know,' said Frodo. 'Whatever it was its fall  seems to
 have dismayed the enemy.'                                         
   'So  it  seems,'  said  Trotter.  'Yet where  they are,  and how
 many,  or  what  they will  do next,  we do  not know.  This night
 must be watchful!'                                                
                                                                  
   At  last  the  boats  were  brought to  the western  bank again.
 Here  they  moored them  close inshore.  They did  not lie  on the
 land that night, but remained in the boats  with weapons  close to
 hand. One sat alert and  vigilant watching  either bank  while the
 other [? read others) dozed uneasily.                             
   Sam (9) looked  at  the moon  again, slipping  down now  swiftly to
 the  horizon.  'It is  very strange,'  he murmured  drowzily. 'The
 moon  I  suppose  does  not  change  his  courses  in  Wilderland?
 Then  I  must  be  wrong  in  my reckoning.  If you  remember, the
 old moon was at its end as we lay on the flet up in that tree.(10)
 Well now I can't remember  how long  we were  in that  country: it
 was certainly three nights,  and I  seem to  remember a  good many
 more - but  I am  certain sure  it was  not a  month. Yet  here we
 are:  seven  days  from  Lorien  and  up  pops  a  New  Moon. Why,
 anyone   would   think   we  had   come  straight   from  Nimrodel
 without  stopping  a  night  or  seeing  Caras  Galadon.  Funny it
 seems.'                                                           
   'And that Sam is probably about the truth of it,'  said Trotter.

                  
                                                                          
 'Whether  we  were  in  the  past or  the future  or in  a time  that does
 not pass,  I cannot  say: but  not I  think till  Silverlode bore  us back
 to   Anduin   did   we   return  to   the  stream   of  time   that  flows
 through  mortal  lands  to  the  Great  Sea.  At  least,  so I  guess: but
 maybe   I   dream   and   talk   nonsense.   Yet   do   either    of   you
 remember  seeing  any   moon  in   Lorien,  old   or  young?   I  remember
 only stars by night and sun by day.(11)                                   
                                                                          
  The  text,  becoming  ragged  at  the  end, now  peters out  in pencilled
 notes for its continuation:                                               
                                                                          
  In  morning  Trotter  and  Legolas  go  forward   to  find   path.  They
 lie  hid  among  rocks  all  day  and at  evening laboriously  cart their
 boats  to  end  of  the  rapids.  (Hear  the  sound  as  they  pass.)  No
 sign  on  far  shore.  Below  rapids  stream  is  soon  quiet   and  deep
 again  -  but  less  broad.  They  creep  along the  west bank  by night.
 They   pass   into   the   gullies  of   Sarn  Gebir.   Pinewoods.  About
 dawn  on  10th  day  come  to  Eregon  [later  >  Tol  Brandor   or  -ir]
 and   hear   roar  and   [?foam)  of   Rauros.  Inaccessible   isle  high
 peak many birds.(12)                                                      
                                                                          
  In  the  journey down  Anduin at  this stage  the chronology  differed by
 one day from that in FR, for the  attack at  the head  of the  rapids took
 place at the end of the seventh day (p. 352),  not of  the eighth  (FR pp.
 400  -  1),  and  much  detail remained  to be  changed or  added: notably
 the incident of Gollum, the 'log with  eyes', was  absent. This  story was
 written on a separate sheet while the drafting of the chapter was still in
 progress, and was immediately  achieved in  the final  form at  almost all
 points.  Some of  the Company  were sleeping  that night  on the  eyot and
 some in the boats;  and after  Frodo had  seen Gollum's  eyes and  had put
 his hand on the hilt of Sting the original text continues:                
                                                                          
 Immediately   they  [the   eyes]  went   out,  and   there  was   a  soft
 splash  and  a  dark  shape   shot  away   downstream  into   the  night.
 Nothing  else  occurred,  until  the  first  grey of  dawn peeped  in the
 East.  Trotter  awoke  on  the  eyot   and  came   down  to   the  boats.
 But  Frodo  now  knew  that  Sam   had  not   been  deceived;   and  also
 that he must warn Trotter.                                                
  'So you know about our little footpad, do you?...                        
                                                                          
  Primary  drafting  from  the  point  reached (the  discussion of  Time in
 Lorien)  is  of  an  extreme  roughness,  some  of  it  scribbled  faintly
 between  the  lines  of  the candidates'  writing on  examination scripts,
 and it is not entirely  complete and  consecutive. In  this case  the fair
 copy  manuscript,  following  immediately  on  the  primary  drafting,  is

                                
                                                                            
 the first  complete text,  and it  is most  convenient to  turn now  to this
 manuscript.                                                                 
    In this version  Chapter XXI  bore a  succession of  titles, all  of them
 pencilled  in  subsequently:  'Southward';   'The  Company   is  Scattered';
 'Sarn  Gebir';  'Breaking  of  the  Fellowship';  and  finally   'The  Great
 River' - this  last not  struck out,  and obviously  arising when  my father
 had  decided  that  his  original  ideas  for  XXI  had  so  expanded  as to
 require  two  chapters  to  fulfil  the  narrative.  As  usual, in  point of
 expression  the  fair  copy  advances  very  largely  to  the  form  in  FR,
 although  a  good  deal of  change in  respect of  the actual  narrative had
 still to come.                                                              
    To  the  original  opening of  the chapter  (p. 350)  my father  made the
 following alteration and addition on the manuscript of the draft:           
                                                                            
 Sam woke him. He was lying in a bed of blankets and furs under              
 tall grey-stemmed trees near the bank of the Great River, in a              
 corner of quiet woodland where a  small stream  (the Limlight)              
 flowed in from the western mountains.                                       
                                                                            
 This is the first mention of the Limlight in the texts. In the fair copy the
 chapter opens:                                                              
                                                                            
 Frodo  was  roused by  Sam. He  found that  he was  lying, well             
 wrapped, under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the             
 woodlands.  [Beside  them a  stream ran  down from  the western             
 mountains far away and joined  the Great  River close  by their             
 camp] on the western bank of the Great River Anduin.                        
                                                                            
 The  sentence  I  have bracketed  was struck  out as  soon as  written. That
 their  first  night  camp  on  the  journey  down the  River was  beside the
 inflow  of  Limlight  agrees  with  maps  IV  and  IV  (p.  317),  where the
 Limlight,  here  first  shown,  joins  Anduin  not  far south  of Silverlode
 (see  Map  II,  square  M 12).,  on map  IV the  confluence is  much further
 south (p. 319).                                                             
    Where the draft has  'Rauros and  the Isle  of Eregon'  (p. 350)  the new
 text has 'Rauros and the  Isle' (changed  later to  'the Tindrock  Isle', as
 in  FR). Trotter's  policy of  letting them  drift with  the stream  as they
 wished  appears;  but  the  chronology  remains  here   as  in   the  draft:
 Nonetheless  they  saw  no  sign  of  any (13) enemy  that  day. The  dull grey
 hours  passed  without  event.  As  this  second  day  of their  voyage wore
 on,  the  lands  changed  slowly...'  The  'Withered  Wold'  of   the  draft
 becomes  'the  withered  wolds'  (and was  then struck  out). The  flight of
 the black swans is still absent.                                            
    Trotter now  speaks of  the latitude  and climate,  the Bay  of Belfalas,
 and their distance from the Shire - but here he first said  'I doubt  if you
 are  much  more  than  sixty  leagues  south  of  the   Sarn  Ford   at  the
 southern  end of  your Shire',  this being  changed at  once to  the reading

  of  FR;  and he  says that  'ere long  we shall  come to  the mouth  of the
  Limlight'  (see  above),(14) defining  the Limlight,  as in  FR, as  the north
  boundary  of  Rohan.  But  he  says  here  'Of  old  all  that  lay between
  Limlight  and  Entwash  belonged to  the Horsemasters'  (FR: 'all  that lay
  between  Limlight  and  the   White  Mountains   belonged  to   the  Rohir-
  rim').                                                                     
    In the  next part  of the  chapter (after  the episode  of Gollum  in the
  river) the story advances to the form in FR, but it was still at the end of
  the seventh day of the journey, not of the  eighth, that  they came  to the
  rapids, and there is no mention at  this point  of the  weather, or  of the
  New  Moon,  which  in  FR (p.  400) was  first seen  on the  seventh night.
  Though  the  bird-haunted  cliffs  of Sarn  Gebir and  the flocks  of birds
  circling high  above are  described in  the same  words as  in FR  (p. 401)
  there  is  no  mention  of  the  eagle  seen  far off  in the  western sky.
  Following the mention of the birds, the new version continues thus:        
                                                                            
  Trotter   had   glanced   often   at   them   doubtfully,    wondering   if
  Gollum  had  been  up  to  some  mischief.  But  now   it  was   dark:  the
  East was overcast, but in the West many stars were shining.                
    After  they  had  been  paddling   for  about   an  hour,   Trotter  told
  Sam  to  lie  forward  in  the  boat  and  keep  a  sharp  look-out  ahead.
  'We  shall  soon  come  to  the  gates  of   Sarn-Gebir,'  he   said;  'and
  the  river  is  difficult  and  dangerous  there,  if  I  remember rightly.
  It   runs   in   deep   swift  channels   under  overhanging   cliffs,  and
  there  are  many  rocks  and  eyots  in  the  stream.  But  I  do  not know
  these  reaches,  for  I  have  never  journeyed  by  water  in  these parts
  before.  We  must  halt  early   tonight,  if   we  can,   and  go   on  by
  daylight.'                                                                 
    It  was  close  on   midnight,  and   they  had   been  drifting   for  a
  while,  resting  after  a  long  spell  of  paddling,  when   suddenly  Sam
  cried out.                                                                 
                                                                            
  After  Boromir's  shouted  remonstrance  ('This  is  a bad  time of  day to
  shoot the rapids!') Trotter,  struggling to  back and  turn his  boat, said
  to  Frodo:  'I  am  out  of  my  reckoning. I  didn't know  we had  come so
  far.  We  must  have  passed  the  gates  of  Sarn-Gebir  in the  dark. The
  Rapids  of  Pensarn  must  be  just  ahead'  (the  last two  sentences were
  crossed  out,  probably  immediately).  There  is  no  indication  here  of
  what 'the gates of Sarn-Gebir' might be (see p. 359).                      
    The  attack  by Orcs  from the  east bank,  and the  struggle to  get the
  boats  back  to  the  west  bank,  follows the  draft pretty  closely, with
  some  changed  or  added   detail:  an   arrow  passed   through  Trotter's
  hood, not his  hair; Frodo  'lurched forward  with a  cry'. The  weather is
  changed  from  the obscure  statements in  the draft  (note 6):  the clouds
  in the  east mentioned  earlier had  now almost  entirely covered  the sky,

 and so 'it was very dark, dark even for the night-eyes  of orcs'  as they
 paddled  the  boats  back.  The  same  is  said of  the New  Moon 'riding
 slowly up the sky'  in 'a  sudden break  in the  cloud-cover away  in the
 East' as in the draft (see note 7); here it is seen 'passing  behind dark
 isles of cloud and out into black pools of night.' In FR (p. 401)  it had
 set hours before.                                                       
   Sam's  remarks  about  Time  in  Lothlorien  remain  almost  exactly as
 in the draft (p. 354), as does Trotter's  reply (in  FR given  to Frodo),
 except that he now  says (as  does Frodo  in FR):  'In that  land, maybe,
 we  were  in  some  time  that elsewhere  has long  gone by.'  Then Frodo
 speaks:                                                                 
                                                                        
   'The  power  of  the  Lady  was   on  us,'   said  Frodo.   'There  are
 days  and  nights  and  seasons  in  Lothlorien;  but  while   she  holds
 the ring, the world grows no older in her realm.'                       
   'That  should  not  have  been  said,'  muttered  Trotter,  half rising
 and  looking  towards  the   other  boats;   'not  outside   Lorien,  not
 even to me.'(15)                                                        
                                                                        
   The  warm  and foggy  morning that  succeeded the  night of  the attack
 and  the  argument  between  Aragorn  and  Boromir  about  the  course to
 follow were  roughly sketched  in initial  drafting, where  the conversa-
 tion proceeds thus:                                                     
                                                                        
   'I  do  not  see  why  we  should  pass  the  rapids  or   follow  this
 cursed  River  any  further,'  said  Boromir.  'If  Pensarn  lies  before
 us,  then  we  can  abandon  these  cockles  and  strike   westward,  and
 so  come  round  the  east   shoulders  of   Sarn-Gebir  and   cross  the
 Entwash into my own land of Ondor.'                                     
   'We  can,  if  we  make  for  Minas  Tirith,'  said Trotter.  'But that
 is  not  yet  agreed.  And  even  so  such  a  course  is   perhaps  more
 perilous  than  it  seems.  The land  is flat  and shelterless  south and
 east  [read  west]   of  Sarn-Gebir,   and  the   [?  first]   ford  over
 Entwash   is   a   great   way   west.(16) Since   the   Enemy   took  ...
 Osgiliath  that  land  may  be  full  of  foes:  what   do  we   know  of
 events of late in Rohan or in Ondor?'                                   
   'Yet  here  the  Enemy  marches   all  along   the  east   bank,'  said
 Boromir.   'And   when   you   come   to   Rauros   what  will   you  do?
 You  must  then  either  turn  back  hitherward,   or  cross   the  hills
 of  Gebir  and  land  in  the  marshes,  and  still  have the  Entwash to
 cross.'                                                                 
   'The  River  is at  least a  path that  cannot be  missed. In  the vale
 of  Entwash  fog  is  a  mortal  peril.  I  would  not abandon  the boats
 until  we  must,'  said  Trotter.  'And  I  have  a  fancy  that  in some

                  
                                                                           
 high place above the Falls we may be able to see some sign that            
 shall direct us.'                                                          
                                                                           
 That  a  'high  place'  would  be  the scene  of a  decisive moment  in the
 unfolding  of  the  story  had already  been conceived:  the summit  of the
 island in  the River  whence Frodo  looked out  (p. 324);  but there  is no
 suggestion  in  Trotter's words  here that  this 'high  place' would  be an
 ancient post of the men of Ondor.                                          
  In  the  fair  copy  manuscript  Boromir  objects:  But  the  Enemy  holds
 the  eastern  bank.  And  even if  you pass  the gates  of Gebir,  and come
 unmolested  to  the  Tindrock,  what  will  you  do  then? Climb  down from
 the hills and land  in the  marshes?' Here,  the 'gates  of Gebir'  are the
 later  Gates  of  Argonath;  thus  the earlier  references (p.  357), where
 Trotter places the 'gates' before the rapids, had already been rejected.
  Of  Trotter's  reply  to  Boromir's  scoffing  question  there  are  three
 forms: a draft text in pencil taking up at this point, and two  versions in
 the  fair  copy  manuscript.  The  first  version  in  the  manuscript  has
 Trotter reply:                                                             
                                                                           
  'Say  rather,  climb down  from the  hills to  Rauros-foot and            
 then take boat again, and hope to slip unseen up the  mouths of            
 Entwash - if we go to Minas Tirith. Do you choose to forget the            
 ancient path, Boromir, and the high seat upon Tol-Brandir, that            
 were made in the days of Valandil?(17) I at least  have a  mind to            
 stand in that high place before I decide my course. There maybe            
 we shall see some sign that will direct us.'                               
                                                                           
 This version of Trotter's  reply was  struck out,  and the  pencilled draft
 (which  continues  on  for  some distance)  seems to  have been  written at
 this point. This draft begins:                                             
                                                                           
  'No,'   said   Trotter.   'Do   you   choose   to  forget,   Eoromir,  the
 North  Stair,  and  the  high   seat  upon   Tol-Brandir  that   were  made
 in the  days of  Isildur? I  at least  have a  mind to  stand in  that high
 place  again  before  I  decide  my  course.  There  maybe  we   shall  see
 some  sign  that   will  guide   us.  Thence   we  [may]   perhaps  descend
 by  the  ancient  way  to  Rauros-foot  and  take   again  to   the  water;
 and   those   who  make   for  Minas   Tirith  may   slip  unseen   up  the
 mouths of Entwash.'                                                        
                                                                           
 Finally,  the second  version written  in the  manuscript is  as in  FR (p.
 406), but still with 'in the days of Isildur' for 'in the days of the great
 kings',  and  the  high  seat  is  still  upon  the  isle  - which  is here
 Tol-Brandor  for  Tol-Brandir  of  the previous  versions. The  isle there-
 fore was not inaccessible; and this is puzzling, for the inaccessibility of
 Tol  Brandir  is  found both  in the  outline given  on p.  328 and  in the
 preliminary draft material for the present chapter (p. 355).               

   Trotter's words before he and Legolas  set off  into the  fog to  find a
 path take this form (and are very similar in the draft):                  
                                                                          
   'No  road  was  ever  made  along  this bank  by the  men of            
 Ondor: for even in their great days their realm did  not reach            
 beyond Sarn-Gebir,  and the  high seat  upon the  Tindrock was            
 their northmost watchtower. Yet  there must  be some  path, or            
 the remains of one;  for light  boats used  to journey  out of            
 Wilderland down to Osgiliath; and still  did so,  until Sauron            
 returned to Mordor.'                                                      
   'But he has returned,' said Boromir; 'and if you go forward,            
 you are likely to meet some peril, whether you find a  path or            
 no.'                                                                      
                                                                          
   The  story  of  the  exploration  made  by  Trotter  and  Legolas, their
 return, the portage of the  boats and  baggage, and  the departure  of the
 Company  next  morning, reaches  in the  fair copy  virtually the  text of
 FR,  with  Pensarn  for  Sarn  Gebir  as the  name of  the rapids  and the
 Gates  of   Sarn-Gebir  for   the  Gates   of  Argonath.   From  painfully
 difficult writing the original description of the Pillars of the Kings can
 be extracted out of the initial drafting, of which I give the following as
 an example:                                                               
                                                                          
 The  great  pillars  seemed  to  rise  up  like giants  before him  as the
 river  whirled  him  like  a  leaf   towards  them.   Then  he   saw  that
 [they]  were  carved,  or  had  been  carved  many  ages  ago,  and  still
 preserved   through   the  suns   and  rains   of  many   forgotten  years
 the   likenesses   that   had   been   hewn   upon   them.    Upon   great
 pedestals  founded  in   the  deep   water  stood   two  great   kings  of
 stone   gazing   through   blurred   eyes   northwards.   The   left  hand
 of  each  was  raised  beside  his  head  palm  outwards  in   gesture  of
 [?warning]  and  refusal:  in  each   right  hand   there  was   a  sword.
 On   each   head   there   was   a   crumbling   crown  and   helm.  There
 was  still  a   power  in   these  silent   wardens  of   a  long-vanished
 kingdom.                                                                  
                                                                          
 In  the  fair  copy  the text  of FR  was almost  reached, through  a good
 deal of correction as the manuscript was being written.                   
   Trotter's words as they  passed through  the chasm  (' "Fear  not!" said
 a strange voice behind him...') are exactly as in FR  (p. 409),  except in
 two  notable respects:  'In the  stern sat  Elfstone son  of Elfhelm'  - a
 decisive  demonstration  of  the  correctness  of the  view (p.  277) that
 Elfstone  had  reappeared   and  supplanted   Ingold;  and   'Under  their
 shadow nought has Eldamir son of Eldakar son of Valandil to fear.'(18)    
 It  seems  very  improbable  indeed  that  some  other  Valandil  is meant

     and  not  the  son  of  Isildur:  only  shortly  before  Valandil   has  been
     named  in a  draft ('in  the days  of Valandil',  p. 359  and note  17, where
     the text immediately replacing this  has 'in  the days  of Isildur'),  and in
     the  corresponding  passage  to  the  present  in  FR  Aragorn  calls himself
     'son  of  Arathorn  of  the  House of  Valandil Isildur's  son'. But  if this
     Valandil  is  the  son  of  Isildur,  then  at  this  stage Trotter/Elfstone/
     Aragorn  was  the  great-grandson  of  Isildur;  and  what  then  are  we  to
     make  of  the  Pillars  of  the  Kings,  carved  many  ages   ago,  preserved
     through  the  suns  and  rains of  many forgotten  years, the  silent wardens
     of   a   long-vanished   kingdom?   How   can   Frodo's   amazement   at  the
     Council  of  Elrond  that  Elrond  should  remember  the  array  of  the Last
     Alliance ('But I thought the fall  of Gilgalad  was many  ages ago',  p. 110)
     be  reconciled  to  a  matter  of  four  generations   of  mortal   Men?  And
     Gandalf  had  said  to  Frodo  at  Rivendell  (p.  105  note  3) that  'he is
     Aragorn   son   of   Kelegorn,   descended   through   many    fathers   from
     Isildur the son  of Elendil.'  For the  moment, at  any rate,  I can  cast no
     light on this.(19)                                                           
        After the description  of the  Pillars of  the Kings  there is  no further
     initial drafting, and the earliest, or earliest extant, text is the fair copy
     manuscript,  in  which  the  conclusion  of  the  chapter  'The  Great River'
     in  FR  is  very  closely  approached.  Trotter,  so  called  throughout  the
     chapter  until  he  becomes  'Elfstone  son  of Elfhelm'  when they  pass the
     Pillars of the  Kings, is  called 'Elfstone'  when he  points to  Tol Brandir
     at the  far end  of the  lake (which  is not  named): see  p. 370.  And after
     'Behold Tol Brandir!' he  says no  more than  'Ere the  shade of  night falls
     we  shall come  thither. I  hear the  endless voice  of Rauros  calling.' The
     journey  had  taken nine  days; in  FR 'the  tenth day  of their  journey was
     over.'                                                                       
                                                                                 
        In  the foregoing  account I  have attempted  to discern  the form  of the
     fair  copy  manuscript  as  my father  first set  it down;  but the  text was
     heavily   worked  on,   and  certainty   in  distinguishing   immediate  from
     subsequent  corrections  is  not  possible   without  close   examination  of
     the   original   papers.   This   manuscript,  as   emended  and   added  to,
     reached in fact almost the  form of  the final  text; yet  an object  of this
     history  is  to  try  to  determine  the  mode  and pace  in which  the whole
     structure  came  into being.  Since some  error is  inevitable, I  have erred
     by  assuming,  if  uncertain,  a  correction  to   be  'later'   rather  than
     'immediate';  but  that   a  good   deal  of   the  development   took  place
     during this present phase of  writing is  clear. In  particular, it  is clear
     that  the  entire  section  of  the  narrative  from  the  end of  the Gollum
     episode  to   the  escape   of  the   Company  from   the  rapids   had  been
     rewritten   before   my   father   reached   'The   Departure   of  Boromir',
     because  an  outline  for  the  opening of  that chapter  (p. 380)  refers to
     Trotter's  having seen  an eagle  far off  from the  river 'above  the rapids
     of   Sarn  Ruin',(20) and  this   element  (previously   absent,  p.   357)  is
                                                                                 
 L                                                                                

  inseparable  from  the  whole  complex of  revision at  this point  in the
  present chapter.                                                          
    This revision was  carried out  on inserted  slips, one  of which  is an
  Oxford  University  committee  report  dated  10  March  1941.  This  slip
  provides  of  course  only  a  terminus  a  quo, and  proves no  more than
  that  my  father was  revising this  chapter during  or after  March 1941;
  while a similar slip, dated 19  February 1941,  used for  initial drafting
  at a later point in Chapter XXI (i.e.  in the  part corresponding  to 'The
  Breaking of the Fellowship' in  FR), proves  no more.  It might  be argued
  that  he  would  scarcely  have  preserved   such  reports   of  committee
  meetings for use long after, and that these revisions therefore  belong to
  1941, but this is  much too  flimsy to  support any  view of  the external
  dating. See further p. 379.                                               
                                                                           
    The  next  version  of  the  chapter  was a  manuscript made  by myself,
  presumptively after 4 August 1942, the  date that  I wrote  at the  end of
  my copy of '[The Mirror of] Galadriel' (p.  261). I  think that  this copy
  of  mine provides  exact evidence  of the  state of  this chapter  when my
  father moved on  from it  to new  regions of  the story,  and I  shall now
  therefore turn to it, noticing first certain names (in the form in which I
  wrote  them,   of  course,   and  before   subsequent  emendation   by  my
  father).                                                                  
    Sarn-Gebir  remains  in  my  copy,  for  later Emyn  Muil; the  Gates of
  Gebir  or the  Gates of  Sarn-Gebir for  the (Gates  of) Argonath;(21) and
  Ondor  for  Gondor.  Trotter  remains  Trotter,  because  my   father  had
  not emended it  on his  manuscript, until  the end  of the  chapter, where
  the Company passes  beneath the  Pillars of  the Kings,  and he  is called
  in the  first manuscript  'Elfstone son  of Elfhelm':  this my  father had
  changed  to  'Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn',  and  my  copy follows.  On the
  other  hand  he did  not correct  'Under their  shadow nought  has Eldamir
  son of Eldakar son  of Valandil  to fear',  and my  copy retains  it. This
  might be thought to be  a mere  inconsistency of  correction on  his part;
  but this is evidently not the case, since on both  manuscripts he  added a
  further step  in the  genealogy: 'Eldamir  son of  Valatar son  of Eldakar
  son of Valandil.'  Since he  did not  strike out  'Eldamir son  of Eldakar
  son  of  Valandil'  on  my  copy,  but  on   the  contrary   accepted  the
  genealogy  and  slightly  enlarged it,  it must  be presumed  that Eldamir
  beside  Aragorn  was  intentional; cf.  FR (p.  409): 'Under  their shadow
  Elessar, the Elfstone son of Arathorn...  has nought  to dread!',  and cf.
  Eldamir  >  Elessar,  p.  294.  My  father's  retention of  the genealogy,
  with the addition  of Valatar,  is also  remarkable in  that it  shows him
  still  accepting  the brief  span of  generations separating  Aragorn from
  Isildur.                                                                  
    By the criterion of presence or absence in  my copy  of the  chapter the
  flight of  the black  swans was  added early.  The chronology  remained as
  it was, the attack at the rapids taking place on the night of  the seventh

 day; and the references to the New Moon  in FR  pp. 400  - 1  are still
 absent. The New Moon still first appears in the  course of  the attack,
 but changed in that the clouds through which it broke  were now  in the
 South, and the Moon rode 'across' not 'up' the sky (see pp. 353, 358).
   The  conversation  concerning  Time  in   Lothlorien  (p.   358)  was
 developed  in  several  competing  and overlapping  riders, and  when I
 came  to make  my copy  my father  evidently instructed  me to  set the
 passage  out  in  variant  forms.  The  opening  speeches   (Sam's  and
 Trotter's  -  the  latter given  in FR  to Frodo)  remained effectively
 unchanged  -  Sam's  now  ending:  'Why,  anyone  would  think  we  had
 come straight on, and never passed no time in the Elvish land at all.'(22)
 The  conversation  that  follows  contains  two pairs  of alternatives,
 which I here mark with numbers: 1 to 1  or 2  to 2  being alternatives,
 and (within 2) 3 to 3 or 4 to 4 being alternatives.                   
                                                                      
 1. 'The  power  of  the  Lady  was  on  us,'  said  Frodo.  'I  do  not
 think  that  there  was  no  time  in  her  land.  There  are  days and
 nights  and  seasons  in  Lothlorien;  and  under  the  Sun  all things
 must  wear  to  an  end  sooner or  later. But  slowly indeed  does the
 world  wear   away  in   Caras  Galadon,   where  the   Lady  Galadriel
 wields the Elven Ring.'{1}
 2. Legolas  stirred  in his  boat. 'Nay,  I think  that neither  of you
 understand  the  matter  aright,'  he  said. 'For  the Elves  the world
 moves,  and  it   moves  both   very  swift   and  very   slow.  Swift,
 because they themselves change little, and all else fleets by: it  is a
 grief  to  them.  Slow,  because   they  do (23) not  count   the  running
 years,  not  for  themselves.  The  passing  seasons  are  but  ripples
 ever  repeated  in   the  flowing/endless   stream.  Yet   beneath  the
 Sun    all    things    must    wear    to    an    end    at    last.'
 3. 'But  Lorien  is  not  as  other  realms  of  Elves  and  Men,' said
 Frodo.  'The  Power  of  the  Lady  was  upon  us.  Slow  for  us there
 might  time  have  passed,  while the  world hastened.  Or in  a little
 while  we  could  savour  much,  while  the  world tarried.  The latter
 was  her  will.  Rich  were  the  hours  and  slow  the wearing  of the
 world  in  Caras  Galadon,   where  the   Lady  Galadriel   wields  the
 Elven Ring.'{3}                                                       
 4. 'But  Lothlorien  is  not  as  other  realms  of  Elves  and Men,'
 said  Frodo.  'Rich  are  the  hours,  and  slow  the  wearing  of  the
 world  in  Caras  Galadon.   Wherefore  all   things  there   are  both
 unstained  and  young,  and  yet  aged  beyond   our  count   of  time.
 Blended  is  the  might  of  Youth  and  Eld  in  the  land  of Lorien,
 where Galadriel wields the Elven Ring.'{4,2}                           
   'That  should  not  have  been said,'  muttered Trotter,  half rising

 and looking towards the other boats; 'not outside Lorien, not              
 even to me.'                                                               
   The night passed silently...                                             
                                                                           
   At the end of the chapter  the lake  remains nameless  in my  copy, first
 Kerin-muil  and  then  Nen-uinel  being  added  to  both  manuscripts;  but
 an  addition  to  my  father's  manuscript  in  which  Aragorn   speaks  of
 Amon  Hen   and  Amon   Lhaw  was   made  before   my  copy   was  written.
 This  addition  is  precisely  as  in  FR  p. 410,  except that  both manu-
 scripts have 'In the days of Isildur' for 'In the days of the great kings',
 and  both  add   after  Amon   Lhaw  '[Larmindon]'   and  after   Amon  Hen
 '[Tirmindon]'.                                                             
                                                                           
   The original drafting  shows that  my father  included all  the narrative
 to the end of 'The Fellowship of  the Ring'  as Chapter  XXI, and  the fair
 copy  manuscript  likewise; but  it is  convenient to  interrupt it  at the
 point  where  the  break  (present  in  my  copy)  between  XXI  'The Great
 River'  and  XXII  'The  Breaking  of  the  Fellowship'   was  subsequently
 made.                                                                      
                                                                           
                                    NOTES.                                   
                                                                           
  1.   Like the companion texts, the last section of 'Farewell to Lorien'
       and 'The Story Foreseen from Lorien', this was written very          
       legibly for one of my father's initial drafts, and with remarkably
       little hesitation. I take up small changes made at the time of       
       composition into the text given.                                     
  2.   This is the first occurrence of Rauros in a text ab initio. For '
       Eregon see p. 345 note 3.                                            
  3.   I have attempted to set out the evolution of the Brown Lands in         
       relation to the First Map on pp. 313 - 16. In this passage appears
       the description of them that survived with very little change into
       FR (p. 396).                                                         
  4.   It looks as if this addition were made immediately. See note 6.
  5.   My father wrote here first Sarn, then Pen, striking them out in         
       turn before arriving at Pensarn (cf. the Etymologies, stems P E N,     
       SAR, V.380, 385).                                                    
  6.   The brackets are in the original. - The weather described is            
       obscure. Nothing is in fact said in this earliest form of the        
       narrative about the weather during the journey down Anduin           
       until the evening of the seventh day, when the weather was clear     
       and cold, and starlit (but this was an addition); now, not much      

      later, it was very dark, though the water reflected  here and  there a
      misty  star.  Then,  'as Legolas  gazed into  the blackness  away east
      the clouds broke.'                                                    
  7.  'Sam  looked  up  at  it  in wonder':  as well  he might,  seeing 'the
      white rind of the  new moon'  rising in  the East  and 'riding  up the
      sky'.  This  is  strangely  paralleled  in VI.325,  where the  moon on
      the  night  spent  by  the  hobbits with  the Elves  in the  Woody End
      was  described  thus:  'Above  the  mists  away in  the East  the thin
      silver  rind  of the  New Moon  appeared, and  rising swift  and clear
      out  of  the  shadow  it  swung  gleaming  in  the  sky.'  In  FR (pp.
      400  -  1)  the  new moon  is seen  glimmering in  the western  sky on
      the  evening  before  the  Orc-attack,  and  on  the  evening  of  the
      attack  'the  thin  crescent  of the  Moon had  fallen early  into the
      pale sunset.'                                                         
        As the  text was  written it  was Trotter  who 'looked  up at  it in
      wonder'.  This  was  changed  first  to  Merry,   then  to   Sam;  see
      note 9.                                                               
  8.  The  dark  shape  'like  a  cloud  yet not  a cloud'  that momentarily
      cut off  the moon's  light is  surely reminiscent  of the  shadow that
      passed  over  the  stars  as  the  Company  journeyed  on  from Hollin
      in  'The  Ring   Goes  South'   (VI.421  -   2),  and   which  Gandalf
      unconvincingly  suggested  might  be  no  more than  a wisp  of cloud.
      Then  too  Frodo  shivered, as  here he  'felt a  sudden chill'.  As I
      noted  (VI.434),  the  former incident  was retained  in FR  but never
      explained:  the  Winged  Nazgul  had  not  yet  crossed   the  Anduin.
      But  it seems  likely to  me that  the shadow  that passed  across the
      stars near Hollin was  in fact  the first  precocious appearance  of a
      Winged Nazgul.                                                        
  9.  Sam  is  again  (see  note  7)  changed  from  Merry,  and  Merry from
      Trotter.  In fact,  the speech  was given  to Sam  before its  end was
      reached,  as  is  seen  from  ' "And  that Sam  is probably  about the
      truth of it," said Trotter'; and  the transition  from one  speaker to
      another  is  seen  in  the  transition from  the very  un-Samlike 'The
      moon  I  suppose  does  not  change  his  courses  in  Wilderland?' to
      'up pops a New Moon'.                                                 
 10.  Cf. the original draft of 'Lothlorien', p. 228: 'The last thin rind of
      the waning moon was gleaming dimly in the leaves.'                    
 11.  Cf.  the  comment  on  Time  in  Lorien  written  on  the   fair  copy
      manuscript of 'Farewell to Lorien', p.  286; and  see further  on this
      matter the 'Note on Time in Lorien' that follows.                     
 12.  On the  emergence of  the idea  of the  inaccessibility of  the island
      see p. 328.                                                           
      any enemy is the correct reading, not an enemy (FR p. 396).           
      Sixty leagues  (180 miIes)  south of  Sarn Ford  agrees well  with the
      more  southerly  confluence  of   Limlight  and   Anduin  on   Map IV(D)
      (p. 319).                                                             

  15. Aragorn says this ('not even to  me') also  in FR  (p. 405);  but at
      this  stage  he  had no  previous knowledge  of Lorien,  and presum-
      ably had no knowledge until this moment of Galadriel's Ring.       
  16. No doubt the  first reference  to the  Entwade, which  was pencilled
      in on map IV(C) and entered on IV(D) (pp. 318 - 19).                     
  17. Valandil is named as the son of Isildur in texts of 'The Council of
      Elrond' (pp. 121, 128, 147).                                       
  18. For an earlier occurrence of Eldakar see p.  276. An  isolated scrap
      (in fact the back of an envelope) has this note:                   
        Trotter's names                                                  
        Elessar                                                          
        Eldamir  (= Elfstone)  son  of  Eldakar  (= Elfhelm).  Or  Eldavel
      = Elfwold.                                                         
      On  the same  envelope is  written, in  almost identical  words, the
      passage  concerning  Frodo's  thoughts  under  Galadriel's  scrutiny
      that was added to the fair  copy manuscript  of 'Galadriel'  (p. 266
      note 32: 'Neither did Frodo...').                                  
  19. On the back of the  preceding page  in the  fair copy  manuscript my
      father scribbled down a first version of  Trotter's words  (in which
      no genealogy appears), and it is  curious that  he wrote  here: 'How
      my heart  yearns for  Minas Ithil...',  changing Ithil,  probably at
      once, to Anor: see p. 333 and  note 27.  - Also  noted down  here in
      extreme haste are thoughts for the story immediately to come:      
        Frodo on Tol Brandir.                                            
        [?Strong) sight. Sees Minas Tirith and Minas Morgul opposed.     
        Sees   Mordor.   Sees   Gandalf.  Suddenly   feels  the   Eye  and
      wrenches off the ring and finds himself crying Wait, wait!         
  20. A passing name for the rapids, replacing Pensarn, was Ruinel.      
      Sarn-Ruin is the name on map IV(C), p. 317. Cf. Dant-ruin,            
      Dant-ruinel, earlier names of Rauros (p. 285).                     
  21. A  passing  form  which  my  father  entered  on   both  manuscripts
      before Argonath was reached was Sern Aranath.                      
  22. When the  chronology was  changed, with  the attack  at the  head of
      the  rapids  taking  place  on the  eighth night,  and the  New Moon
      seen far away in the West on the seventh and eighth evenings,      
      Sam's  words  were  expanded  (and  entered  on  both  manuscripts),
      though subsequently largely rejected:                              
        Yesterday evening I saw  it, as  thin as  a nail-paring,  and this
      evening it  wasn't much  bigger. Now  that's just  as it  should be,
      if  we'd  only been  in the  Elvish land  for about  a day,  or more
      than   a   month.  Why,   anyone  would   think  that   time  slowed
      down in there!                                                     
  23. The  phrase  as  my  father  wrote  it  was  'because they  need not
      count  the  running years',  but in  copying I  missed out  the word
      need.  Looking through  my copy,  but without  consulting his  own '
      manuscript, he wrote in do; and do survives in FR (p. 405).        

                           Note on Time in Lorien.                         
                                                                          
 The  narrative  passages  that  introduce  this   question  are   found  on
 pp.  285 -  6, 354  - 5,  358, 363,  and in  note 22  above. This  note is
 primarily concerned with  the various  time-schemes that  bear on  it, but
 for  their  understanding  it is  necessary to  consider the  chronology a
 little more widely.                                                       
  The  first  time-scheme  to  be  considered  here  I  will call  'I'; for
 previous references to it see pp. 169, 215  note 1,  and 344  - 5.  In its
 'Lothlorien' section it obviously belongs with the  first drafting  of the
 story,  and  preceded  the  emergence  of  the  idea  that  there   was  a
 different Time in the Golden Wood. Here the dates are:                    
                                                                          
  Nov. 24. Leave Rivendell.                                                 
  Dec. 6. Hollin (Full Moon).                                               
       9. Snow on Caradras.                                            
      11. Reach Moria.                                                      
      13. Escape to Lothlorien (Moon's last quarter).                       
      14. Go to Caras Galadon.                                              
      15. Night at Caras Galadon.                                           
      16. Mirror of Galadrien.                                              
      17 - 21. Stay in Caras Galadon (Dec. 21 New Moon).                    
                                                                          
 This stands at the foot of a  page, but  a second  page, though  in pencil
 and not in ink, was clearly continuous:                                   
  Dec. 22 - 31 Remain at Caras Galadon, leave with the New Year            
   (Dec. 28 Moon's first quarter)                                          
  Jan. 1 - 4 No notes against these dates except Jan. 4 Full Moon.         
 On  the  departure  of  the  Company  from  Lorien on  New Year's  Day see
 p. 253 and note 28. But at this point, it seems, the idea of the disparity
 of  time  entered;  for after  Jan. 4  my father  wrote: 'Dec.  15 onwards
 time at Caras  does not  count, therefore  they leave  on morning  of Dec.
 15' (cf. p. 286: 'if  Lorien is  timeless ...  nothing will  have happened
 since they entered'). The rest of the scheme is  based on  this chronology
 (and has been given on pp. 344 - 5)                                       
  At first the journey  down the  Great River  was only  to take  two days:
 'Dec.  17  Reach  Tolondren.  Dec.  18  Flight  of  Frodo.  Dec.  19 Frodo
 meets  Sam  and  Gollum.'  This  was  struck  out,  with  the  note: 'Take
 ten  days  to  reach  [Emris  )  Eregon  >]  Tolbrandir'  (on   Emris  see
 pp. 316 - 18  and note  12). The  New Moon  that caused  Sam to  raise the
 question  of  Time  in  Lorien  was  still  on Dec.  21; and  they reached
 Tolbrandir in the evening of Dec. 25.                                     
  Another scheme ('II') takes up at Dec. 22, but this is based on a later
 date of  departure from  Rivendell: Dec.  25, as  in FR.  The chronology
 of  FR  from Rivendell  to Lothlorien  was not  yet reached,  however, for
 two reasons: first, that the journey to Hollin still  took eleven  days and
 not  fourteen  (pp.  165,  169);  and  second,  that in  FR there  are two

 Yule-days  after  Foreyule  (December)  30  as  against  Dec.  31   in  scheme
 II.  Thus  II  is  two  days  in  advance of  FR. The  numerical dates  in II,
 when  the  Company  left  Rivendell   on  Dec.   25,  soon   become  identical
 to  those  in  I,  when  they  left on  Nov. 24,  simply because  November has
 30  days  but  December  has  31;  thus in  I they  crossed the  Silverlode by
 the  rope-bridge  and  entered the  Gore on  Dec. 14,  and in  II on  Jan. 14.
 At this point the scheme in II reads:                                        
   Jan. 14 Over Silverlode                                                    
      Time ceases                                                             
   Jan. 15 Leave Lorien                                                       
 Scheme  II  continues  for  some  way  on  this  basis  before  petering  out.
 These  therefore  are  the  relations  between  the  former   chronology  (I),
 the new (II), and FR:                                                        
                                                                             
                               I.                      II.            FR.      
                                                                             
   Leave Rivendell.            Nov. 24.              Dec. 25.       Dec. 25.
   Hollin.                     Dec. 6.               Jan. 6.        Jan. 8.
   Snow on Caradras.           Dec. 9.               Jan. 9.        Jan. 11.
   Reach Moria.                Dec. 11.              Jan.  11.      Jan. 13.
   Escape from Moria.          Dec. 13.              Jan.  13.      Jan. 15.
   Cross Silverlode.           Dec. 14.              Jan.  14.      Jan. 16.
   Leave Lorien.               [Jan. 1 >] Dec. 15.   Jan.  15.      Feb. 16.
   Reach Tol Brandir.          Dec. 25.              Jan.  25.      Feb. 25.
   Flight of Frodo.            Dec. 26.              Jan.  26.      Feb. 26.
                                                                             
   In  II  the  New  Moon was  on Jan.  21, just  as in  I it  was on  Dec. 21,
 and  against  this  date  in  II  is also:  'Battle with  Orcs?' This  was the
 seventh  day  of  the  voyage  down Anduin,  as in  the texts.  But it  is odd
 that in both  I and  II the  journey took  eleven days,  whereas in  the texts
 it took nine (pp. 361 - 2).                                                  
   At  the  foot  of  the  page  carrying  scheme  II  my  father  wrote: 'Does
 Time  cease  at  Lorien  or  go  on  faster?  So  that it  might be  Spring or
 nearly  so.'  With  this  cf.  p. 363:  'The Power  of the  Lady was  upon us.
 Slow  for  us  there  might  time  have  passed,  while  the  world  hastened.
 Or  in  a little  while we  could savour  much, while  the world  tarried. The
 latter was her will.'                                                        
                                                                             
   Another  chronology  of  far  greater  elaboration,  made   after  the     
 changes introduced  in October  1944 (see  p. 406),  was still  based on     
 the conception that 'exterior' Time ceased in Lorien, for it begins:         
                                                                             
   Thurs. Jan. 19. Fifth day of voyage.                                        
   Fri.        20. Sixth day.                                                         
   Sat.        21. Seventh day. Sam observes New Moon and is
                      puzzled.                                                

  Lastly, another later scheme of dates begins:                          
                                                                         
    They  spend  what  seems  many  days  in  Lorien,  but  it is  about the
    same time and  date when  they leave.  [Added: In  fact, one  day later,
    time moving about 20 times slower (20 days = 1).]                     
                                                                         
  Here the  Company again  leaves Lorien  on Jan.  15, but  the chronology
  of  the  journey  approaches  that  of  FR:  'Sam sees  New Moon  low in
  West after sunset' on Jan. 21, but  as in  FR the  attack by  Orcs takes
  place on the night of the eighth day, here Jan. 22;  and Tol  Brandir is
  reached at dusk on Jan. 24. Here this scheme ends;  but across  the page
  my father afterwards wrote these separate notes:                        
    Why have any difference of time? Shift the dates a month forward.     
    If Lorien time is not different, then no need for Sam to see the      
    Moon.                                                                 
    Better to have no time difference.                                    
                                                                         
    A passage in the first manuscript of  'The White  Rider' (p.  431) may
  be mentioned here: Gandalf tells that after his  rescue by  Gwaihir from
  the peak above Moria he  came to  Lothlorien and  'tarried there  in the
  long time which in that land counts for but a brief hour of the world'.
                                                                         
  Phases of the Moon                                                      
    Either  while  the  making  of  Time-scheme  I was  in progress  or at
  some later point my father wrote at the head  of the  first page  of it:
  Moons are after 1941 - 2 +  6 days.  He changed  this to  + 5  days, and
  added: thus Full Moon Jan.  2 is  Jan. 7.  The phases  of the  Moon were
  entered on scheme I in red pencil, and it is very  hard to  know whether
  they belong with its making or were put  in later.  Many of  these dates
  were  much  changed,  but  no  discernible relation  with the  phases of
  1941 - 2 emerges, the dates  in the  scheme varying  between two  to six
  days later. The phases as  entered, also  in red  pencil, on  scheme II,
  when  the  departure  from  Rivendell  took  place   on  Dec.   25,  are
  however regularly five days later than those of 1941 - 2, beginning with
  New  Moon  on Dec.  23, and  then First  Quarter on  Dec. 30,  Full Moon
  Jan.  7,  Last  Quarter  Jan.  15, New  Moon Jan.  21 (against  which is
  written the time: 9.32), First Quarter  Jan. 29  (time 6.35),  Full Moon
  Feb. 6. It is possible, therefore, though far from certain, that  it was
  only with  scheme II  and the  decision to  postpone the  departure from
  Rivendell  by  a  month  that my  father decided  to pattern  the phases
  precisely on those of 1941 - 2.                                         
    It will be seen shortly (p. 379) that  my father  was working  on 'The
  Departure of Boromir' in the  winter of  1941 -  2. The  postponement of
  the departure from Rivendell is first seen in an  outline for  the story
  following  the  ride  of  Gandalf  and  his  companions from  Fangorn to
  Eodoras (p. 434 and note 1; see also pp. 422 - 3).                      

                                   XVIII.                                
                        THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP.                     
                                                                           
 In the latter part of the original chapter 'XXI' initial drafting  and 'fair
 copy'  were  a  continuous  process.  Up  to  the point  where Sam  broke in
 on  the  discussion  among  the  Company  beside  the  river  with  'Begging
 your  pardons,  but  I  don't  think you  understand Mr.  Frodo at  all' (FR
 p.  419),  the  drafting  is  very  rough  indeed,  with  separate  passages
 written in slips and not forming  a consecutive  narrative, while  the 'fair
 copy'  is  itself  a  mass  of  correction  and  rewriting  in  the  act  of
 composition.  Some  passages  gave  my  father   great  difficulty   and  he
 experimented  with  their  ordering  and  phraseology  in  many  forms.  But
 from  that  point,  and  evidently made  after the  'fair copy'  had reached
 it, there is a clear primary draft, in which the story just as  it is  in FR
 (pp. 419 - 23) 'wrote itself', on the  basis of  a preliminary  outline; and
 the  fair  copy  from  here  onwards  can  be  properly  so called.  In this
 manuscript  the  text  of  FR  was effectively  reached throughout,  but the
 division  of  'XXI'  into  two,  with a  new chapter  'XXII The  Breaking of
 the  Fellowship',  was not  made until  after the  text had  been completed.
                                                                           
  At  first  Trotter is  'Elfstone', not  corrected, in  both draft  and fair
 copy  (see  p.  361),  but  soon  becomes  'Trotter', and  is then  so named
 throughout.                                                                
  The draft text begins:                                                    
                                                                           
  That  night  they  went  ashore,  and camped  upon a  green sward         
 beneath the slopes  of [added:  Amon Hen]  the western  hill. They         
 set a watch, but they saw no sign of any enemy  or spy.  If Gollum         
 had  contrived  to  follow  them,  he remained  unseen. 'I  do not         
 think  he would  dare the  passage of  the Gates,'  said Elfstone.         
 'But  he  may have  travelled far  over the  hills, while  we were         
 delayed  at  Pensarn. By  now he  knows the  country well,  and he         
 will guess too much  of our  divided purposes.(1) For we  have with         
 us what he long possessed and it  draws him  ever towards  us. "If         
 they turned west at Pensarn," he will say, "then for a time  I can         
 do no more.  Sooner or  later I  shall know,  and then  Gollum can         
 find a way, even to the walls of Minas-Tirith. But if they did not         
 turn west there is but one end to the river-road: Tol  Brandir and         
 Rauros, and the North Stair. There they  must go  West or  East. I         
 will watch  upon the  East." Likely  enough he  spied us  with his         

 fell eyes far off from the eastern beaches or from some post             
 among the hills.'                                                        
   The day came like fire and smoke...                                    
                                                                         
 Amon  Hen looks  as if  it were  added immediately,  and is  probably the
 first occurrence of the  name. An  addition to  the draft  text introduces
 the   nocturnal   conversation   between  Trotter   and  Frodo   and  the
 drawing of Sting to see  what its  blade would  show -  a sign  that the
 attack by Orcs had  now entered;  but here  it is  Frodo who  feels 'some
 shadow or threat', and  it is  Frodo who  says 'I  thought as  much. Orcs
 are near. But how came they  across the  river? Never  have I  heard that
 they  came  into  this  region  before', with  an authoritative  tone more
 characteristic  of  Trotter. In  the fair  copy Trotter's  surmises about
 Gollum's  intentions  were  lost,  and  the opening  of the  chapter 'The
 Breaking of the Fellowship'  in FR  was attained,  except that  the green
 lawn  beneath  Amon   Hen  was   named  Kelufain,   subsequently  changed
 to Calenbel.(2)                                                          
   The  description  of  Tol  Brandir  as  Frodo  saw  it   that  morning,
 already in the primary draft very close to  the final  form (FR  p. 412),
 with  its  sides  springing  sheer out  of the  running water  (where 'no
 landing place could be seen'), shows that the idea of its inaccessibility
 was  present  (see  p.  359).  The  conversation  before  Frodo  departed
 from the Company  alone was  very largely  achieved at  once, but  in the
 fair copy  Trotter says:  'My own  heart desires  to go  to Minas-Tirith,
 but that is for myself and apart from your  Quest', this  being rejected,
 probably  immediately;  and  in  both  texts, in  very similar  words, he
 says: 'Very well, Frodo  son of  Drogo. You  shall be  alone. But  do not
 let your thoughts be too dark. For after  you have  chosen you  shall not
 be alone. I will not leave you, should you decide to go  to the  gates of
 Baraddur;  and  there  are others  of the  same mind,  I think.'  To this
 Frodo replied, in the fair copy: 'I know, and it does  not aid  my choice
 [> it does not help me at all].' The primary draft continues:            
                                                                         
   The  others  remained  behind  near  the  shore,   but  Frodo   got  up
 and   walked   away.  Sam   watched  his   master  with   great  concern.
 Then  the  Company  turned  again   to  debating   what  they   could  do
 to  aid  the  Quest,  hopeless  as  it  seemed  [struck out:  and whether
 it  were  wise to  try and  end it  swiftly or  to delay].  Boromir spoke
 strongly,  urging  ever  the   wisdom  of   strong  wills,   and  weapons,
 and  great  plans  he  drew  for  alliances,  and  victories  to  be, and
 the overthrow of Mordor.(3)                                              
   Sam  slipped  away  unnoticed.   'If  orcs   are  anywhere   nigh,'  he
 muttered,  'I  am  not  going  to  let  Mr.  Frodo  wander  about  alone.
 In  his  frame  o'  mind  he  would  not  see an  elephant coming,  or he
 might walk off the edge of a precipice.'                                 

  In the meanwhile aimlessly wandering Frodo found that his              
 feet had led him up the slopes of the hill.                             
                                                                        
 The idea that  Sam left  the Company  at this  point was  evidently very
 soon abandoned.                                                         
  The   encounter   with   Boromir   on  Amon   Hen  was   now  developed
 from the form it had reached in the outline given  on pp.  325 -  7, and
 with much difficulty the text of FR was  achieved. I  give here  so much
 as I can puzzle out  of the  form in  which my  father first  wrote down
 what  Frodo  saw  when  he  looked  out  from   Amon  Hen   wearing  the
 Ring (for the brief suggestions in previous outlines see p. 327 and note
 7 and p. 366 note 19): his writing here  is at  its most  difficult, the
 marks very weak and the pen seeming to float or glide on the paper.     
                                                                        
  Northward  he  looked,  and  the   Great  River   lay  like   a  ribbon
 beneath   him,   and   the   Misty   Mountains   small   and   hard   as
 broken   teeth.   Eastward   into  wide   uncharted  lands   he  looked.
 West  he  gazed  and  saw  little  horsemen  galloping  like   the  wind
 upon   wide   green   plains,  and   beyond  was   the  dark   tower  of
 [Isengard o] Orthanc in the ring of Isengard.                           
  Southward   he   looked.....   Ethir   Anduin   the  mighty   delta  of
 the  Great  River,  and  myriads  of  seabirds  [like  a  dust  of white
 specks]  whirling...  like  a  white  dust,  and  beneath  them  a green
 and silver sea rippling in endless moving lines.                        
  But   everywhere   he   looked  he   saw  signs   of  war.   The  Misty
 Mountains  were  like  anthills  to  his  sight:  orcs  were  [?pouring]
 out   from   countless   [?holes].   Under   the   boughs   of  Mirkwood
 there  was  deadly  strife.  The  land  of the  Beornings was  aflame. A
 cloud  was  over  Dimrilldale  /  Moria  gates.  Smoke  rose   upon  the
 borders   of  Lorien.   [Dol  Dughul]   Horsemen  galloping   wildly  on
 the  grass   of  Rohan,   wolves  poured   forth  from   Isengard.  From
 the   grey   southward   Havens   [or  Haven]   an  endless   column  of
 armed   men   came.  Out   of  the   wild  East   men  were   moving  in
 endless     [?shining]     swordmen,     [?spearmen],     bowmen    upon
 horse;  chariots  and  wains:  whole  peoples.  All  the  power  of  the
 Dark Lord was in motion.                                                
  Then  as   he  came   back  south   he  saw   Minas  Tirith.   Far  and
 beautiful   it   was,   white-walled,   many-towered,   high   upon  its
 mountain  seat  strong  in  the  sun:  its  battlements  glittered  with
 steel  and  its  turrets  were  bright  with  many  banners.............
 was  Minas  Morgul.......   its  dark   walls  carven   with...  shapes,
 its great tower like a  tooth, its  banners black,  its gates  like evil
 mouths,   and   to   eastward   the   Shadow   of  Death   the  hopeless

 [?gates] of Gorgoroth. Then he saw the.........     ... Mount [Doom        
 >] Dum: the Hill of Fire and.... Baraddur.                                 
  Then   suddenly   his   gaze   halted.   The   [?mists  cleared]   and  he
 cried  aloud  in  fear.  There   was  an   eye  in   Baraddur.  It   did  not
 sleep.  And  suddenly   it  had   become  aware   of.......  There   was  a
 fierce  eagerness...  [?will]...  It  leapt  towards  him,  almost  like  a
 finger  he  felt  it  [?feeling] for  him. In  a minute  it would  nail him
 down,   know   just   exactly   [?to   an   inch]   where   he   was.  Amon
 Lhaw  it   touched,  it   glanced  at   Tol  Brandir   -  he   cast  himself
 from   the   seat,   [?crouching,   covering]  his   head  with   his  grey
 hood.  He  was  crying   out  but   whether  he   was  saying   Never  will
 it  get  me,  never,  or  Verily  I  come,  I  come  to  you, he  could not
 say. [?Probably] both.                                                     
  Then   as   a  flash   from  some   other  point   of  power   there  came
 ...  another  thought.  Take  it  off.  Take  it  off.  0 foolish!  Take it
 off.   The   two   powers   strove   in   him:   for  a   moment  perfectly
 balanced   between   their...   points   he   writhed.   Suddenly   he  was
 aware of himself.                                                          
                                                                           
 In  the  complete  manuscript that  followed the  draft, with  much further
 correction  and  experimentation  of   phrase  as   he  wrote,   my  father
 reached  the  final  form;  but  the  opening description  of Frodo  in the
 high seat (for which there is no earlier drafting) in this manuscript is of
 much interest. As  first written,  with a  good deal  of correction  in the
 process, the passage read:                                                 
                                                                           
  At  first  he  could  see  little: he  seemed to  be in  a world  of mist
 in  which  there  were  only  shadows.   The  Ring   was  on   him.  [Then
 the   virtue   (written   above:   power)   of   Amon   Hen   worked  upon
 him]  Then  here  and  there  the  mists   gave  way   and  he   saw  many
 things:  small  and  clear  as  if  they  were  beneath  him  on  a  table
 and   yet  remote:   the  world   seemed  to   have  shrunk.   [Added:  He
 heard   no   sound,   seeing   only   bright   images   that   moved   and
 changed.](4) He looked   South   and   saw  below   his  very   feet  the
 Great   River   curve   and  bend   like  a   toppling  wave   and  plunge
 over  the  falls  of  Rauros  into  a  foaming  pit:  the  fume  rose like
 smoke  and  fell  like  rain  lit   by  a   glimmering  rainbow   of  many
 colours.  More   remote  still   beyond  the   roaring  pools   were  fens
 and    black    mountains,    many    streams    winding    like   shining
 ribbons.  Then   the  vision   changed:  nothing   but  water   was  below
 him,  a  wide  rippling  plain  of  silver,  and  an  endless   murmur  of
 distant waves upon a shore he could not see.                               

   He  looked  West  and  saw  horsemen   galloping  like   the  wind:
 their                                                                 
   On  beyond  the  falls  his  eye  wandered,  here   crossing  reed-
 grown  fens,  there  marking  the  winding  ribbons of  swift streams
 leaping down from small hard black mo(untains).                       
                                                                      
 At this point my  father rejected  the entire  passage from  the words
 'Then  the  virtue  (power)  of Amon  Hen worked  upon him'  and began
 again:                                                                
                                                                      
   At first he could see little: he  seemed to  be in  a world  of mist
 in   which   there   were  only   shadows.  The   Ring  was   on  him.
 [Struck  out  at once:  But also  he sat  now upon  the seat  of Sight
 which  the  Men  of  Numenor  had  made.]  Then  here  and  there  the
 mists gave way and he saw many visions...                             
                                                                      
 The new text then reaches the form in FR (p. 416); Frodo is sitting on
 'the seat of Seeing, upon Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the  Men of
 Numenor.'                                                             
   Frodo 'seemed to be  in a  world of  mist in  which there  were only
 shadows.  The  Ring  was  on  him.  Then  the  power  of   Amon  Hen
 worked upon him': and the mists began to break.  Still clearer  is the
 next stage of revision: '... The Ring was on him. But also he  sat now
 upon  the  seat  of  Sight  which the  Men of  Numenor had  made. Then
 here and there the mists  gave way...'  Only one  interpretation seems
 possible: the wearing of the Ring inhibited his  sight -  he was  in a
 world of mists and shadows; but nonetheless he was sitting on the Seat
 of Seeing on the Hill of the Eye, and  'the power  of Amon  Hen worked
 upon him.' On the other hand, in the last outline written  before this
 point in the narrative was actually reached, the idea of the  'Seat of
 Seeing' had not emerged (p. 327): Frodo was 'standing on rocks' in the
 Stone Hills when Boromir attempted to take the Ring. It is  said there
 that  from  this  place  the range  of the  Mountains of  Shadow could
 be glimpsed 'like a smudge of grey, and  behind it  a vague  cloud lit
 beneath occasionally by a fitful glow'; but when Frodo put on the Ring
 'he saw nothing about him but a grey formless mist, and far  away (yet
 black and clear and  hard) the  Mountains of  Mordor: the  fire seemed
 very red.' In its origin, then, the peculiar clarity of Frodo's vision
 on this occasion derived  solely from  the wearing  of the  Ring. This
 question is discussed further on pp. 380 - 1.                         
   When   Frodo  came   down  from   the  summit   of  Amon   Hen,  and
 putting on the Ring again 'vanished and  passed down  the hill  like a
 rustle of the wind', the primary  draft continues:  'The power  of the
 Ring  upon  him  had  been  renewed;  and maybe  it aided  his choice,
 drawing him to Mordor, drawing him to the Shadow, alone.'             
                                                                      
 There exists a rough outline for the last part of the chapter, where

 the  story  turns  from Frodo  to the  Company, sitting  where he  left them
 beside  the  river.  This was  written in  faint pencil,  subsequently inked
 over.                                                                      
                                                                           
 Frodo   does  not   come  back   in  an   hour.  The   hour  wears   on  to
 two,   and   the   sun   is  at   noon.  Trotter   gets  anxious.   He  saw
 Boromir  go  off,   and  return.   'Have  you   seen  Frodo?'   'No,'  said
 Boromir,  lying  with  a  half  truth.  'I  looked  for  him and  could not
 see  him.'  [Added:?  'Yes,'  said  Boromir,  'but  he  ran  from   me  and
 I   could  not   find  him.']   Trotter  decides   they  must   search  and
 blames   himself   for   allowing   Frodo  to   go  alone.   Boromir  comes
 back ?                                                                     
    Great  agitation,  and  before  Trotter  can   control  them   they  all
 run  off  into   the  woods.   Trotter  sends   Boromir  after   Merry  and
 pippin.   He  runs   himself  toward   the  Hill   of  Amon   Hen  followed
 by  Sam.  But  suddenly   Sam  stops   and  claps   his  head.   'You're  a
 fool,   Sam   Gamgee.   You   know   quite   well    what   was    in   Mr.
 Frodo's  mind.  He   knew  he   had  to   go  East   -  that   old  Gandalf
 intended  it.  But  he  was  afraid,  and  still  more  afraid   of  taking
 anyone   with  him......   He's  run   away,  that's   it  -   and  .......
 boat.'(5) Sam   dashed   down   the   path.   The   green   camp-ground  was
 empty.  As  he  raced  across  it  he  gasped.  A  boat  was   grinding  on
 the  shingle  -  seemingly  all  by  itself  was  slipping into  the water.
 It  was  floating  away.   With  a   cry  Sam   raced  to   the  water-edge
 and  sprang  after  it.  He  missed  it  by  a  yard  and  fell  into  deep
 water. He went under with a gurgle.                                        
    Conversation of Sam and Frodo. They go off together.                    
                                                                           
    At  this stage  my father  was not  intending to  end the  chapter here,
 and  this  sketch  continues  into  the  story  of  what  became  the first
 chapter  of  The  Two  Towers,  III.1  'The  Departure  of Boromir';  but I
 postpone the remainder of it to the next chapter in this book.             
                                                                           
    The  discussion  among  the  members  of  the  Company   during  Frodo's
 absence  took  draft  after draft  to  achieve,(6) and  though   the  actual
 content  of  what was  said does  not greatly  differ from  the form  in FR
 (pp. 418 - 19) it was at first given in part to different speakers (thus in
 the earlier form it is Trotter who emphasizes,  as does  Gimli in  FR, that
 on no member of the Company save Frodo was obligation laid).               
    Notably, there  appear in  these drafts  the phrases  found in  FR: 'the
 Lord  Denethor   and  all   his  men   cannot  hope   to  do   what  Elrond
 declared  to  be  beyond  his  power',  and 'Boromir  will return  to Minas
 Tirith.  His  father  and  people  need  him.'  This  is  where   the  name
 Denethor  first  emerged, with  only the  slightest initial  hesitation: my
 father  wrote  a  B,  or  perhaps  an  R, then  Denethor.(7) That  Boromir was

  the son of Denethor is clear, and is explicit in the outline given at the
  beginning of the next chapter; in any case  he was  named long  before as
  the son of the King of Ond (VI.411).                                     
    As  I  have  said,  from  the  point  where   Sam  intervened   in  the
  discussion the conclusion  of The  Fellowship of  the Ring  was virtually
  achieved at its first drafting and with very little hesitation, and there
  are only two matters to  notice. One  concerns the  return of  Boromir to
  the  Company,  where  at  first  he replied  to Trotter's  question quite
  differently (cf. the outline on p. 375):                                 
                                                                          
    'He has not returned then?' asked Boromir in return.                   
    'No.'                                                                  
    'That's strange. To say the truth I felt anxious about him, and        
  went to seek him.'                                                       
    'Did you find him?'                                                    
    Boromir hesitated for an instant. 'I could  not see  him,' he          
  answered, with half the  truth. 'I  called him  and he  did not          
  come.'                                                                   
    'How long ago was that?'                                               
    'An  hour  maybe.  Maybe more:  I have  wandered since.  I do          
  not know! I do not know!' He put his head in his hands and said          
  no more.                                                                 
    Trotter looked wonderingly at him.                                     
                                                                          
  This was rejected at once and  replaced by  his account  as it  stands in
  FR.  -  The  other  passage  is  that  describing Sam's  headlong descent
  down the slopes of Amon Hen:                                             
                                                                          
  He   came   to   the   edge   of   the   open camping-place (8) where  the
  boats  were  drawn  up  out  of  the  water.  No  one  was  there.  There
  seemed  to  be  cries  and  faint  hornblasts  in  the woods  behind, but
  he did not heed them.                                                    
                                                                          
  Before  this  was written,  my father  had already  sketched out,  in the
  continuation of the outline of which I have  given the  first part  on p.
  375, the story of the  Orc-attack and  Boromir's death  (p. 378).  He had
  now  abandoned  important  elements in  his former  vision of  the course
  of the  story after  the disintegration  of the  Company: the  journey of
  Merry and Pippin  up the  Entwash, and  the evil  dealings of  Boromir in
  Ondor (pp. 211 - 12, 330). So  far as  written record  goes, it  was only
  now  that  he  perceived  that  Boromir  would  never  return   to  Minas
  Tirith.                                                                  

                                NOTES.                                    
                                                                        
  1. I think that Trotter's meaning was: 'he will guess, too, much  of our
     divided purposes.'                                                  
  2. The fair copy in fact followed  the draft  in the  opening sentences,
     and  the  paragraph  with  which  'The  Breaking  of  the Fellowship'
     opens  in FR,  describing the  green lawn  (Parth Galen),  was added.
     As the  manuscript was  written, the  green lawn  was not  named. See
     note 8, and p. 382.                                                 
  3. This sentence was subsequently marked: 'Put this  into his  talk with
     Frodo' (cf. FR p. 414).                                             
  4. The sentence a little later in  this passage,  'an endless  murmur of
     distant  waves  upon  a  shore  he  could not  see', was  not changed
     when this was added.                                                
  5. Written  transversely  across  this  part  of  the  text,  before the
     underlying pencil was inked  over, and  extremely difficult  to read,
     is the following:                                                   
       A  good  arrangement  would  be  for  Frodo  running  down  hill to
     run   [?into]   orcs   attacking  Merry   and  Pippin   and  Boromir.
     Boromir  is  aware  of  his  presence.   When  Boromir   falls  Frodo
     escapes  [to  or  (in)  the]  boat  - because  Frodo would  not leave
     Merry and Pippin in hands of orcs.                                  
     I do not understand the implication of the last sentence.           
  6. One  of these  drafts is  written on  an Oxford  University committee
     report dated 19 February 1941: see p. 362.                          
  7. In the First Age Denethor  led the  Green-elves over  Eredlindon into
     Ossiriand. On the name see V.188.                                   
  8. Replaced  in  pencil  in  the fair  copy manuscript  by 'the  lawn of
     Kelufain': see note 2.                                              

                                    XIX.                                  
                          THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR.                       
                                                                         
 I mentioned in the last chapter that the outline for the end of  the story
 of 'The Breaking of the  Fellowship' (p.  375) in  fact continues  on into
 the narrative of the  first chapter  ('The Departure  of Boromir')  in The
 Two Towers (henceforward abbreviated as TT).                             
                                                                         
  Horns   and   sudden   cries   in   the  woods.   Trotter  on   the  hill
 becomes   aware   of   trouble.   He   races   down.   He   finds  Boromir
 under  the  trees  lying  dying.  'I  tried  to   take  the   Ring,'  said
 Eoromir.  'I  am  sorry.  I  have  made  what   amends  I   could.'  There
 are  at  least  20  orcs  lying  dead  near him.  Boromir is  pierced with
 arrows   and   sword-cuts.   'They   have   gone.   The   orcs   have  got
 them.  I  do  not  think  they  are  dead.  Go   back  to   Minas  Tirith,
 Elfstone,  and  help  my  people.  I  have  done  all  I could.'  He dies.
 Thus  died  the  heir  of the  Lord of  Minas Tirith.  Trotter at  a loss.
 He   is   found   standing   perplexed   and  grief-stricken   by  Legolas
 and  Gimli  (who  have  driven   off  a   smaller  company).   Trotter  is
 perplexed.  Was  Frodo  one  of  the  hobbits?  In   any  case   ought  he
 to  follow  and  try  to  rescue?  Or  go  to  Minas  Tirith?   He  cannot
 go  in  any   case  without   burying  Boromir.   With  help   of  Legolas
 and  Gimli  he  carries  Boromir's  body  on  a   bier  of   branches  and
 sets it in a boat, and sends it over Rauros.                             
  Trotter  now  finds  that  one   boat  is   missing.  No   orc-prints  at
 camp.   Whether   hobbit-marks   are   old   or   new   cannot   be   made
 out.  But  Sam  is  missing.  Trotter  sees  that  either  Frodo  and Sam,
 and  Merry  and  Pippin,  were   together,  or   Frodo  (and   Sam?)  have
 gone  off.  Now  little  or  no  hope  of  finding  Frodo in  latter case.
 He  with  Gimli   and  Legolas   decide  to   follow  Merry   and  Pippin.
 'On  Amon  Hen  I  said  I  might  see  a  sign  to  guide  us!   We  have
 found  a  confusion  -  but  our  paths  at  least are  set for  us. Come,
 we  will  rescue  our  companions  or  else  we  will  die  after  slaying
 all the orcs we can.'                                                    
                                                                         
 An addition to this text, certainly of much the same time, reads:        
                                                                         
  Trotter sees by the shape and arms of the dead orcs that they           
 are northern orcs of the Misty Mountains - from Moria? In fact           

 they are orcs of Moria that escaped the elves, + others who are           
 servants of Saruman. They  report to  Saruman that  Gandalf is           
 dead. Their mission is to capture hobbits including  Frodo and           
 take them to Isengard. (Saruman  is playing  a double  game and           
 wants the Ring.)                                                         
                                                                         
 At the bottom of the page is written:                                    
                                                                         
 Does Trotter have any vision on Amon Hen? If  he does,  let him          
 see (1) an Eagle coming down. (2) old man, like Frodo [sees] in          
 mirror. (3) orcs creeping under trees.                                   
                                                                         
   While  working  on  the  book  my  father  would sometimes  'doodle' by
 writing,  often in  careful or  even elaborate  script, names  or phrases
 from a newspaper that lay beside  him or  on which  his paper  rested. On
 the back of the sheet carrying this outline - an examination script, like
 most of the paper he used  - he  wrote out  many such  odds and  ends, as
 'Chinese  bombers',  'North  Sea  convoy';  and  among  them   are  'Muar
 River' and 'Japanese  attack in  Malaya'. It  is out  of the  question, I
 think, that  these writings  on the  verso should  come from  a different
 time from the text on the recto. It is certain, therefore, that  the time
 was now the winter of 1941 - 2.(1)                                       
   This obviously agrees  with my  father's statement  in the  Foreword to
 the  Second  Edition  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  that  he   'came  to
 Lothlorien and the  Great River  late in  1941.' He  said that  'almost a
 year' had passed since he halted  by Balin's  tomb in  Moria; but  I have
 ' argued (VI.461), I think with good reason, that he  stopped in  fact at
 the end of 1939.  To maintain  this view  it must  be supposed  of course
 that  something like  two years  (1940 -  1) passed  between the  halt in
 Moria and the  point we  have now  reached; but  further evidence  on the
 subject seems to be lacking.                                             
                                                                         
   There  are  two  preliminary  versions  of  'Trotter  upon  Amon  Hen',
 the first  proceeding directly  from the  suggestions at  the end  of the
 outline just given.                                                      
                                                                         
   Trotter  sped  up  the  hill.  Every  now  and  again  he  bent  to the
 ground.  Hobbits  go  light,  and  their  footprints  are  not  easy even
 for  a  ranger  to  pick  up.  [Most of  the path  was stony,  or covered
 with  old  leaves  still lying  thick; but  in one  place a  small spring
 crossed  it,  and  here  Trotter  stooping  saw   tracks  in   the  moist
 earth,  and  beyond on  the stones  faint traces.  'I guessed  right', he
 said.  When  he  came  to  the  top  he  saw...](2) But  not  far  from the
 top  a  small  spring  crossed  the  path  and  in the  wet earth  he saw
 what   he  was   looking  for.   Quickly  he   ran  forward   across  the
 flagstones  and  up  the  steps.  'He   has  been   here,'  he   said  to

 himself.  'Not  so  long  ago his  wet feet  came this  way, [and  up the
 steps.] He climbed to the seat. I wonder what he saw?'                    
   Trotter   stood   up   and  looked   round.  The   sun  seemed   to  be
 darkened,  or  else  the   eastern  clouds   were  spreading.   He  could
 see  nothing  in   that  direction.   As  his   glance  swept   round  it
 stopped.  Under   the  trees   he  saw   orcs  crawling   stealthily: but
 how  near  to  Amon   Hen  he   could  not   guess.  Then   suddenly  far
 away  he  saw  an  eagle,   as  he   had  seen   it  before   above  Sarn
 Ruin.(3) It  was  high  in   the  air,   and  the   land  below   was  dim.
 Slowly  it  circled.  It   was  descending.   Suddenly  it   swooped  and
 fell out of the sky and passed below his [? view].                        
   As  Trotter  gazed  the  vision   changed.  Down   a  long   path  came
 an  old  man,  very  bent,  leaning  on  a  staff.  Grey  and  ragged  he
 seemed,  but  when  the  wind  tossed  his  cloak  there  came   a  gleam
 of  white,  as  if  beneath  his rags  he was  clad in  shining garments.
 Then the vision faded. There was nothing more to be seen.                 
                                                                          
   At  the  end  of the  text, and  I think  immediately, my  father wrote:
 'The  second  vision on  Amon Hen  is inartistic.  Let Trotter  be stopped
 by noise of orcs, and let him see nothing.'                               
                                                                          
   The  second  version continues  on into  Trotter's leaping  descent from
 the  summit,  his  discovery  of Boromir,  and his  words with  him before
 he  died.  Though  written  here  in  the  roughest  fashion the  text was
 scarcely changed afterwards, except in one  respect: here  (following the.
 instruction at the end of the first version) Trotter does not go up to the
 high seat at all:                                                         
                                                                          
   Trotter  hesitated.  He  himself  desired  to  [sit  in  the  Seat  of.
 Seeing  >]  go  to  the high  seat, but  time was  pressing. As  he stood
 there  his  quick  ears  caught  sounds  in   the  woodlands   below  and
 to   his   left,   away  west   of  the   River  and   camping-place.  He
 stiffened:  there  were  cries,  and  among  them   he  feared   that  he
 could  distinguish  the  harsh  voices  of  orcs;  faintly   and  desper-
 ately a horn was blowing.                                                 
                                                                          
   In the  first version  the power  of the  Seat of  Seeing upon  Amon Hen
 'works  upon'  Trotter  indeed,  but  the  visions  he  sees  are isolated
 scenes,  more  akin  in  their  nature perhaps  to those  in the  water of
 Galadriel's  Mirror  than  to  the   vast  panorama   of  lands   and  war
 vouchsafed  to  Frodo.  In  the  second draft  he does  not ascend  to the
 high seat, and therefore sees nothing.  In the  fair copy  manuscript that
 immediately followed he  does go  up, as  in TT,  but again  sees nothing,
 save  the  eagle  descending  out of  the sky:  'the sun  seemed darkened,
 and  the  world  dim  and  remote.'   Why  should   this  be?   The  utter

 
                                                                          
 unlikeness  of the  experiences of  Frodo and  of Aragorn  in the  Seat of
 Seeing is not explained.  I have  said (p.  374) that  as my  father first
 drafted the account  of Frodo's  vision it  is explicit  that it  was 'the
 power  of  Amon  Hen',  and  not the  wearing of  the Ring,  that accorded
 it  to  him;  and  the  first version  of Aragorn's  ascent to  the summit
 shows this still more clearly (by the very fact that  he also  saw visions
 there). The final text of Frodo's vision is less explicit, and if  this is
 associated with the fact that in  the final  form Aragorn  does go  up but
 sees  nothing  it  may  suggest  a  more  complex  relation   between  the
 power of Amon  Hen and  the power  of the  Ring, a  relation which  is not
 uncovered.                                                                
                                                                          
   As  I  have  said, the  second of  the original  drafts for  'Trotter on
 Amon  Hen' (4) continues  to  the  death  of  Boromir,  and  there are  a few
 details worth mentioning: it is not said (nor is it in the fair copy) that
 the  glade  where  Boromir  died  was  a  mile or  more from  the camping-
 place (TT pp. 15, 18);  Trotter says  'Thus passes  the heir  of Denethor,
 Lord of the T[ower]' ('Lord of the Tower of  Guard' in  the fair  copy, as
 in  TT);  and  very  oddly, Boromir  says 'Farewell,  Ingold' -  which can
 surely  be  no  more  than  an  unwitting  reversion  to the  former name,
 instead of  'Elfstone'. In  the fair  copy, where  he is  otherwise called
 'Trotter'  throughout,  Boromir  says  'Farewell,  Aragorn'; and  this was
 probably the first time  that the  name 'Aragorn'  was used  again (apart,
 of course, from  later correction  at earlier  points) after  its abandon-
 ment.                                                                     
   A full and tolerably legible draft takes  up just  a little  further on,
 from the coming of  Legolas and  Gimli to  the glade,  and there  are only
 very minor differences  from TT  (pp. 16  - 17)  as far  as 'The  River of
 Ondor  will  take care  that no  enemy dishonours  his bones'  (here given
 to Legolas). At this point in the draft manuscript there is a little hasty
 sketch,  reproduced  on  p.  383,  which  indicates  a  difference (though
 immediately  rejected)  from the  later story:  Legolas alone  returned to
 the camping-place. In the  sketch are  seen the  rill that  flowed through
 the  greensward  there,  and  the  two remaining  boats (the  third having
 been  taken  by  Frodo)  moored  at  the water's  edge, with  Tol Brandir,
 and  Amon  Lhaw  beyond;  X  marks  the  battle  where  Boromir  died.  At
 the  shore  is  the  boat  brought  back  by  Legolas,  marking  the place
 where Boromir's body was set aboard it.                                   
   In  the  draft  text  there  is  no  mention  of  finding  the  hobbits'
 'leaf-bladed' knives (cf. VI.128, FR p. 157), nor  of Legolas'  search for
 arrows  among the  slain; the  first is  absent from  the fair  copy also.
 Then follows:                                                             
                                                                          
   'These are not orcs of Mordor,' said Trotter. 'Some are from            
 the Misty Mountains, if I know anything of orcs and their [gear           
 >] kinds;  maybe they  have come  all the  way from  Moria. But           

 what  are  these?  Their  gear is  not all  of goblin-make.'  There were
 several  orcs  of  large  stature,  armed  with  short  swords,  not the
 curved   scimitars   usual   with   goblins,   and   with   great   bows
 greater  than  their  custom.  Upon  their  shields  they bore  a device
 Trotter  had  not  seen  before:  a small  white hand  in the  centre of
 the  black  field.  Upon  the  front  of  their  caps was  set a  rune 
 fashioned of some white metal.(5)                                       
   'S is for Sauron,' said Gimli. 'That is easy to read.'                
   'Nay,' said Legolas. 'Sauron does not use the Runes.'                 
   'Neither  does  he use  his right  name or  permit it  to be  spelt or
 spoken,'  said  Trotter.  'And  he  does  not  use  white.  The  orcs of
 his  immediate  service  bear  the  sign  of the  single eye.'  He stood
 for  a  moment  in  thought. 'S  is for  Saruman, I  guess,' he  said at
 last.  'There  is  evil afoot  at Isengard,  and the  West is  no longer
 safe.  What  is  more:  I  guess  that  some  of  our  pursuers  escaped
 the  vigilance  of  Lorien  or  avoided that  land, passing  through the
 foothills,  and  that  Saruman  also  knows  now  of  our  journey,  and
 maybe  of   Gandalf's  fall.   Whether  he   is  merely   working  under
 the  command  of  Mordor,   or  playing   some  hand   of  his   own,  I
 cannot guess.'                                                          
   'Well, we have no time to ponder riddles,' said Gimli.                
                                                                        
 With this  compare the  passage added  to the  outline on  pp. 378  - 9.
 -  Both  Legolas  and  Gimli  now  went back  to the  green lawn  of the
 camping-place,  which  is  here  named  Kelufain,  corrected  to Forfain,
 and  that in  turn to  Calen-bel (all  these changes  being made  at the
 moment of writing),(6) but they returned  together in  a single  boat. Thus
 whereas  in  TT,  where  they  brought  both  the  remaining  boats, the
 three companions in the  one towed  out the  other bearing  Boromir, and
 after passing Parth Galen cast it loose, here  Legolas took  the funeral
 boat to Calen-bel while  Trotter and  Gimli returned  there on  foot. At
 Calen-bel,  'All  three  now embarked  in the  remaining boat,  and drew
 the funeral boat out into the running river.' In the fair copy the final
 story entered as my father wrote the text.                              
   Apart from this,  the account  of Boromir's  departure is  almost word
 for word as in TT, save that his hair is called 'gold-brown' (so also in
 the fair copy, changed to 'long brown'; 'dark' in TT), and that it ends:
                                                                        
 But in Ondor it was long recorded in song that the elven-boat           
 rode the falls and the foaming pit, and bore him down through           
 Osgiliath, and past the many mouths of  Anduin, and  out into           
 the Great Sea; and the voices of a thousand seabirds lamented           
 him upon the beaches of Belfalas.                                       

 Sketch-plan of the scene of the Breaking of the Fellowship.

 There  is no  suggestion however  that any  lament was  sung for  him by
 his companions; the draft reads here simply:                            
                                                                        
 For  a   while  the   three  companions   remained  gazing   after  him,
 then  silently  they  turned  and  drove  their  boat  back  against the
 current to Calen-bel.                                                   
   'Eoromir   has   taken  his   road,'  said   Trotter.  'Now   we  must
 swiftly determine our own course....'                                   
                                                                        
 The fair copy manuscript is virtually the same. The earliest extant text
 of the lament  for Boromir  (Through Rohan  over fen  and field,  TT pp.
 19  -  20)  was  however  found with  these draft  papers, and  a finely
 written text was inserted  into the  fair copy,  with re-writing  of the
 surrounding prose, at some later time. The earliest version  is entitled
 [Song  >]  Lament  of  Denethor  for  Boromir, and  only differs  in few
 and  minor  points from  the form  in TT;(7) of rough  working there  is a
 page  bearing the  most primitive  sketching of  phrases for  the lament
 (including the  East Wind,  that blows  'past the  Tower of  the Moon'),
 and  another  of  rough  working  for  the  North  Wind (which  seems to
 have been swiftly achieved).                                            
   It might seem, from  the original  title Lament  of Denethor,  that it
 was at first intended to be indeed the father's own  song of  grief, and
 not merely in form: to be brought in at a later point in the  story. But
 against this are the first words on the page  of rough  working, clearly
 belonging  to  the  same  time: ' "They  shall look  out from  the white
 tower and listen to the sea," said Trotter in a low voice.' The song is,
 in  any  case,  Denethor's  Lament.  The  occurrence  of  'Trotter' here
 suggests that it belongs to this time, for before much more of the story
 was  written  'Aragorn'  would replace  'Trotter' as  the name  by which
 he is generally referred to. Another pointer in the same direction  is a
 line  found  in  the  rough   working:  'The   North  Wind   blows  from
 Calen-Bel',  since  in  the  course  of  the  writing  of the  fair copy
 manuscript the name changes from Calen-bel to Calembel (note 6).(8)     
                                                                        
   Trotter was at first less certain in his observations  and conclusions
 when  he  examined  the ground  at Calen-bel;  and he  did not  think to
 examine the baggage (nor yet in the fair copy). I cite the next  part of
 the draft text, which here becomes very rough, in full:                 
                                                                        
   'No  orcs  have  been here,'  he said  at last.  'But otherwise  it is
 not  possible  to  say  anything: all  our footprints  are here,  and it
 is  not  possible  to  say  whether  any  of  the  hobbits'   feet  have
 returned  since  the  search  for  Frodo  began. I  think, but  I cannot
 be  sure,  that  a  boat was  dragged to  the water  at this  point,' he
 said,  pointing to  the bank  close to  where the  rill from  the spring
 trickled into the river.                                                

 'How then do you read the riddle?' asked Gimli.                          
 'I think that Frodo returned from the hill-top wearing the               
 Ring,'  said  Trotter.  'He  may  have   met  Sam,   but  I   think  not:
 Frodo   was   probably   wearing   the   Ring.   I   think   Sam  guessed
 Frodo's   mind:   he   knew   it   better   from   love   than   we  from
 wisdom; and caught him before he went.'                                  
 'But  that  was  ill  done,  to  go   and  leave   us  without   a  word,
 even if he had seen the orcs and was afraid,' said Gimli.(9)             
 'No,  I  think  not,'  said  Trotter.  'I  think  Sam  was right.  He did
 not  wish  us  to  go  to  death  in  Mordor,  and  saw  no other  way to
 prevent  that  but  by  going  alone  and  secretly.  No,  I  think not,'
 said  Trotter.  'He  had  a  Something  happened  on  the  hill  to  make
 him  fly. I  do not  know all,  but I  know this.  Boromir tried  to take
 the Ring by force.'                                                      
 Exclamation of horror from Legolas and Gimli.                            
 'Think  not  ill   of  him,'   said  Trotter.   'He  paid   manfully  and
 confessed.'                                                              
                                                                         
 Then follows in pencil:                                                  
                                                                         
 Don't let Trotter tell of Eoromir's misdeed?                             
          They draw up boat. Set out west after orcs. Trotter's plan is
 to  descend  from  Sarn  Gebir  into   Rohan  and   try  and   learn  of
 orcs and borrow horses.                                                  
 Legolas sees Eagle from escarpment, descending.                          
 They   meet   an  old   man  coming   up  hill   to  meet   them.  Don't
 recognize  him,  though  there  is  something  familiar.  Suspect  he is
 Saruman?                                                                 
                                                                         
 The  final  story of  the reappearance  of Gandalf  moves a  step closer.
 In  the  'Plot' written  before Lothlorien  was reached  (p. 211)  it was
 Gimli and Legolas, on their  way back  North, who  fell in  with Gandalf,
 Aragorn  having  gone  with  Boromir  to Minas  Tirith; and  Gandalf then
 'hastens south' with them.  This was  still the  story in  the subsequent
 outline  (p. 329).  Now, the  death of  Boromir having  entered, Trotter,
 Gimli and Legolas are as in the  final story  on the  trail of  Merry and
 Pippin  when  they  encounter  Gandalf  returned;  but  they are  to meet
 him  before  their  journey  through  Rohan has  begun, before  they have
 set foot in the grasslands. The  descending eagle  that Legolas  saw from
 the escarpment of Sarn Gebir  was bearing  Gandalf (see  p. 396);  and it
 is clear that the eagle that Trotter saw descending to earth as he looked
 out  from  the summit  of Amon  Hen in  the original  draft (p.  380) was
 the first appearance of this idea.(10)                                   

   In the fair copy the suggestion in this outline that Trotter should not
 tell Gimli and Legolas what Boromir had done was taken up:               
                                                                         
 '...  Something  occurred  after  he  left us  to make  his mind  up: he
 must  suddenly  have  overcome  his  fear  and  doubt.  I  do  not think
 that  it  was  a  meeting  with orcs.'  What he  thought it  was Trotter
 did not say. The last words of Boromir he kept ever secret.              
                                                                         
 This was changed, probably at once, to the  dialogue in  TT (p.  21), but
 it is still said of Trotter that 'the last words of Boromir he  kept ever
 secret' ('he long kept secret', TT).                                     
                                                                         
   The  draft  text  becomes   formed  narrative   again  with   words  of
 Trotter's  that in  TT are  given to  Legolas: ' "One  thing at  least is
 clear," said Trotter. "Frodo is no longer on this side of the River. Only
 he could or would have  taken the  boat. As  for Sam,  he must  be either
 with  Merry or  Pippin or  Frodo, or  dead. He  would have  returned here
 otherwise  ere  now."  '  Gimli's  words  that  follow,   and  Trotter's,
 expounding his decision to follow the  Orcs, are  much as  in TT';  and I
 give the remainder of the draft, which at the end peters out, in full:
                                                                         
   They drew up the last boat and carried it to the trees, and laid       
 beside it such of their goods as they did not need and could not         
 carry. Then they struck west. Dusk was already falling.                  
   'Go warily,' said Gimli. 'We are assuming that all the orcs            
 made off after they had slain Boromir and captured Merry and             
 Pippin. But those that attacked Boromir were not the only ones.          
 Legolas and I met some away southwards on the west slopes of             
 Amon Hen. We slew many, creeping on them among the trees:                
 the cloaks of Lorien seem to deceive their sight. But many more          
 may still linger.                                                         
   'We have not time for wariness. We will follow the trail from          
 the glade. Well is it that Orcs do not walk like hobbits! No folk,       
 even Men of the cities, make such a trampling, and they slash            
 and hack and beat down growing things as they pass, as if the            
 breaking of things delighted them.                                       
   'It is plain to see which way they went - west near to the .           
 shore, but not on it, keeping to the trees.'(11)                         
   'But orcs go swiftly,' said Gimli. 'We shall have to run!'             
   'If my guess is right,' said Trotter, 'and they make for               
 Isengard, they will descend from the hills into Rohan. [Struck .         
 out: There they will not dare to journey save by night - and I           
 wonder indeed how they cross) Mayhap we can get horses in                
 Rohan,' said Trotter. 'If my guess is right and the orcs are             
 making for Isengard, they will                                           

   I  interrupt  the  narrative here  because, although  my father  had no
 thought of halting, initial drafting from this point is lost (p. 390).
   The draft that takes up with  the coming  of Legolas  and Gimli  to the
 glade  (p.  381)  is  numbered   on  each   page  'XXIII',   and  'XXIII'
 continues  on  through  the  story of  the chase  across Rohan;  the fair
 copy likewise begins 'XXIII' at 'Trotter sped on up  the hill',  with the
 title 'The Riders of  Rohan', though  another title  apparently underlies
 this. Although all these were pencilled additions  to the  manuscripts in
 ink, I think it very probable that by this time the  chapter-divisions of
 LR  had  been  introduced:  XXI  'The  Great  River'  ending   after  the
 passage  of  the  Pillars  of  the Kings  and XXII  'The Breaking  of the
 Fellowship'  ending  at  the  departure  of  Frodo  and  Sam,  with XXIII
 extending  all  the  way  from   Trotter's  ascent   of  Amon   Hen  into
 whatever  adventures  might  befall  the  three  companions   from  their
 setting out from Calembel on the trail of the Orcs.                     

                               NOTES.                                       
                                                                           
  1. The  Japanese  invaded  Thailand  and  N.E.  Malaya  on  7  -  8  Decem-
     ber  1941.  The  crossing  of  the   Muar  River   was  on   16  January
     1942.  This  information  has  been  kindly  provided   by  Mr.   F.  R.
     Williamson.  -  Further  evidence  is  provided  by   the  use   of  the
     Moon's phases of 1941 - 2; see p. 369.                                 
  2. This  passage  was  placed within  square brackets  in the  original, as
     also was 'and up the steps' immediately following.                     
  3. On  the  eagle  seen  far  off  on  the   evening  before   the  Company
     came to the rapids of Sarn Ruin see pp. 361 - 2.                       
  4. At  the  top  of  the  page   carrying  this   text  are   written  many
     experimental    Elvish   names:    Llawhen,   Amon    Tirlaw,   Lhawdir,
     Lasthen,  Henlas,  Hendlas,  all  being  struck out  save the  first and
     last. I am at a  loss to  account for  these satisfactorily.  Since both
     Amon   Hen   and   Amon   Lhaw   appear   in   primary    drafting   and
     outlines  that  obviously  preceded  this text,  it is  perhaps possible
     that  the  names  already stood  on the  page before  my father  used it
     for  the  account of  Trotter on  Amon Hen.  If this  were so,  it might
     be  -  since  all  of  them  are  compounds  of  elements  one  of which
     refers to hearing (l(h)aw, las(t)) and the other to sight  (hen(d), tir)
     -  that  they were  devised before  the eastern  and western  hills were
     distinguished as the Hill of Hearing and the Hill of Sight.            
  5. The  Old  English  S-rune  is found  also in  the fair  copy manuscript,
     but  there  with  the  vertical  strokes  strongly  curved,   the  upper

      curve open to the left, the lower to the right. In that text the caps
      of the Orcs become 'leathern caps' ('iron helms' TT).                
  6.  The name Kelufain for the green lawn below Amon Hen was              
      added to the fair copy of 'The Breaking of the Fellowship', and in
      one instance changed to Calenbel (p. 371 and note 2). In the fair
      copy of the present chapter the name was Calenbel at the first       
      occurrence but subsequently Calembel (and once Calembel).            
  7.  The differences are:                                                 
      Verse 1: line 1 Through the mountain-pass, through Rohan )           
         Over mountains tall, through Rohan                                
               5 over many streams                                        
      Verse 2: 2 brings                                                    
               4 Why tarries Boromir the fair? For Boromir I grieve.      
      Verse 3: 4 Where now is Boromir the bold?                            
               5 I heard his horn.                                        
                                                                          
      In  every  case  these readings  were replaced  in careful  script by
      those  in  TT.  At  first  only  the third  verse had  the concluding
      couplet  beginning  0  Boromir!;  but against  this my  father wrote:
      'Omit?  Or  put  extra  couplet  onto  the  other stanzas?'  and then
      provided  them,  as  in the  final form.  Certain other  changes were
      put in later: see note 8.                                            
  8.  The  text of  the Lament  inserted into  the fair  copy is  the final
      form,  though  here  written  in  short  lines. An  accompanying page
      gives  'Alternatives  to  Song  of  Boromir',  which  were  not used.
      These  change  verse  1  line  3  tonight?  to  this  morn?,  line  4
      becoming  Have  you  seen  Boromir  the  fair  or  heard  his blowing
      horn?;  and  verse  2  line  3 at  eve? to  tonight?, line  4 becoming
      Where  tarries  Boromir  the tall  by moon  or by  starlight? Another
      variant  given  here  was  to change  verse 2  line 3  at eve?  to at
      morn?,  line  4  becoming  Where  dwells   now  Boromir   the  fair?
      What  valleys  hear  his  horn?  These  changes  were  pencilled also
      onto  the first  text of  the song.  - In  LR Calembel  is a  town in
      Lamedon ('The Passing of the Grey Company', at end).                 
  9.  Cf. the passage given on p. 377 note 5.                              
 10.  Both  sightings  of  the  eagles  survived  in  TT:  Aragorn  on Amon
      Hen  still  sees  one  descending,  and  Legolas  sees  one  from the
      western escarpment of the Emyn Muil (see pp. 396 - 7).               
 11.  Though  no  speaker  is  named, this  speech ('We  have not  time for
      wariness') is certainly Trotter's.                                   

                                  XX.                                  
                          THE RIDERS OF ROHAN.                         
                                                                      
 A single page of extremely  rough notes,  headed 'Sketch'  and 'XXIII'
 was written in pencil, and partly inked over.                         
                                                                      
  Dusk.  Night.  Track  less  easy  to  follow.  Sarn-Gebir  runs North-
  South.(1) They  press on  through night.  Dawn on  ridge -  then.... the
  escarpment.  Legolas  sees  eagle  far  away. (Fangorn.)(2)  Rich vegeta-
  tion.                                                                
   They  see  Black  Mountains,  100   miles  south.   Entwash  winding.
  Find orc trail going  up river.  Meeting with  Rohiroth. They  ride to
  Fangorn  and  hear  news  of  battle  and  destruction  of   orcs  and
  mysterious  old  man  who  had  discomfited  orcs.  They hear  that no
  captives were rescued. Despair. Old man appears.                     
   [Added:  XXV  and  later.] They  think he  is Saruman.  Revelation of
  Gandalf, and his  account of  how he  escaped. He  has become  a white
  wizard. 'I forgot most  of what  I knew.(3) I was  badly burned  or we/I
  burned.' They go to Minas Tirith and enter in.                       
   Rest  of  war in  which Gandalf  and I  on his  eagle in  white leads
  assault must be told later - partly a dream of  Frodo, partly  seen by
  him  (and Sam),  and partly  heard from  orcs. (?  Frodo looks  out of
  Tower, while prisoner.)                                              
   Minas  Tirith  defeats  Haradwaith.  They  cross at  Osgiliath [writ-
  ten  above:  Elostirion],  defeat  orcs  and  Nazgul.  Overthrow Minas
  Morghul,  and  drive  forward  to  Dagorlad  (Battle Plain).  They get
  news that Ringbearer is captured.                                    
   Now Treebeard.                                                      
   Then Frodo again.                                                   
                                                                      
 In those passages where the original  text was  inked over  the under-
 lying pencil can be largely made out, and it  is seen  that Haradwaith
 was present: this appears on the First Map, translated  Sutherland, as
 the name of the great region south of Mordor  and east  of the  Bay of
 Belfalas (Map III, p. 309).(4) On the other hand Nazgul, here first met
 with,  was  not, and  nor was  Dagorlad (the  pencilled text  had only
 Battle  Plain);  the  First Map  had Dagras,  changed to  Dagorlad (p.
 310). Elostirion above Osgiliath was  also an  addition when  the text
 was inked over; on this new name see p. 423. -  There are  other notes
 on the page which do not relate directly to the  foregoing consecutive
 sketch, but which may be given here.                                  

 (1)  Greyfax  [>   Shadowfax].  Halbarad.   Horse  of   Gandalf  reappears
 - sent  for from  Rivendell. Arrives  later. It  is 500  - 600  miles from
 Rivendell and would take Shadowfax 10 - 14 days.                          
                                                                          
 The   name   Halbarad  was   added  at   the  same   time  as   Greyfax  >
 Shadowfax,  and  these  changes  look  as if  they were  made at  once. In
 Gandalf's tale in the fifth version of 'The Council  of Elrond'  the horse
 that   Gandalf   got   in   Rohan   was   likewise   named   Halbarad  and
 Greyfax,  and  there  Greyfax  was  certainly  changed  to   Shadowfax  in
 the act of writing.  In that  text there  is no  mention of  what happened
 to  Shadowfax  after  Gandalf  reached  Rivendell  (see  p.  152);  but an
 isolated slip of paper  has a  note on  this (together  with a  passage of
 initial  drafting  for  'The  King  of  the  Golden Hall'):  'Some account
 of  "Shadowfax"  in  the  house  of   Elrond  must   be  given   and  what
 arrangements  were  made  about  him.  Or  did  he  just  run   off  after
 Gandalf got to Rivendell? How did Gandalf summon him?'                    
                                                                          
 (2) Rohiroth are relations of Woodmen and Beornings, old Men of           
 the North. But they speak Gnomish - tongue of Numenor and                 
 Ondor, as well as [?common] tongue.                                       
 (3) Trotter should know Eomer.                                            
 (4) Marhad Marhath is 2nd Master. [Written in margin: Marhad              
 Marhath Marhelm Marhun Marhyse Marulf](5)                                 
 (5) Eowyn Elfsheen daughter of Eomund?                                    
                                                                          
 On  the back  of this  page is  very rough  drafting for  the conversation
 with  Eomer (p.  400), but  there is  also here  the note:  Eowyn Elfsheen
 daughter of Theoden.                                                      
                                                                          
 The  original  manuscript  of  'The Riders  of Rohan'  is a  difficult and
 chaotic document, and its textual history was hard  to ascertain.  In this
 chapter  (numbered  throughout   'XXIII'  and   without  new   title,  see
 p.  387),  as  in  those  that  follow,  my  father adopted  the practice,
 occasionally found earlier, of erasing his  primary draft,  or substantial
 portions  of  it, and  writing a  new version  on the  pages where  it had
 stood. In this case the  original drafting  from the  point reached  on p.
 386 ('If my guess  is right  and the  orcs are  making for  Isengard, they
 will') is lost for a long stretch through  erasure and  the re-use  of the
 pages, though here and there bits of it can be  read. The  original draft,
 which  I will  call 'A',  emerges however  at the  point in  the narrative
 (corresponding   to   TT  p.   29)  where   Aragorn,  Legolas   and  Gimli
 approached  the  low  downs  to  the  east  of  the  river   Entwash,  and
 continues through the story  of the  encounter with  the Riders;  at which
 point my father abandoned it, realizing that the story  as he  was telling
 it was 'not what really happened' (see the letter cited on p. 411). It was
 now  that  he  returned  to  the  beginning,  and began  a new  text ('B')
 using the erased pages  of A  up to  the point  mentioned. It  seems clear

 that what survives of A survives because it was written largely in ink
 and not in pencil. The structure of the manuscript is thus:            
      A erased       B written on erased A                              
      A not erased; ends because abandoned                              
                               B continued independently
 The textual history of the writing of the chapter is of course  simply A
 followed by B.                                                         
   Both ways  of presenting  the material  have their  disadvantages, but
 after much experimentation it seems  to me  best to  look first  at what
 remains of A. This I give in full, excepting only one passage.         
                                                                       
 [Their  elven-cloaks  faded  against  the]   background,  and   even  in
 the  clear  cool  sunlight  few  but  elvish eyes  would have  seen them
 until  close  at  hand as  they passed,  running or  striding tirelessly
 with a brief pause every three hours or so.                            
   That   evening   they   reached   the  low   downs.  A   narrow  strip
 of  moist  green  land  some  ten  miles  wide  lay  between   them  and
 the  river  winding  in  dim  thickets  of  sedge  and  reed.  Here  the
 Entwash  and  the  line  of  downs  bent  due  north,(6) and  the orc-trail
 was  plain  to  see  under  the  lee  of the  hills. 'These  tracks were
 made  today,'  said  Trotter.  'The  sun  was  already  high  before our
 enemy  passed.  We  might   perhaps  have   glimpsed  them   far  ahead,
 if there had been any rising ground to give us a long view.'           
   'Yet  all  the  while  they  draw  nearer  to  the  mountains  and the
 forest,  where  our  hope  of  aiding  our  friends  will   fail,'  said
 Gimli.   Spurred   by   this   thought   the   companions   sped  onward
 again   through  the   dusk,  and   far  into   the  night.   They  were
 already  half-way  along  the  downs  before  Trotter  called   a  halt.
 The   waxing   moon  was   shining  bright.   'Look!'  he   said.  'Even
 orcs  must  pause   at  times.'   Before  them   lay  a   wide  trampled
 circle,  and  the  marks of  many small  fires could  be seen  under the
 shelter  of  a  low  hillock. 'They  halted here  about noon,  I guess,'
 said  Trotter.  'How  long  they  waited  cannot be  told, but  they are
 not  now  many  hours  ahead.  Would   that  we   need  not   stay;  but
 we  have  covered  many  a  long  league  since  we  last slept,  and we
 shall  all  need  our  strength  maybe  tomorrow,  if  we  come  up with
 our enemies at last.'                                                  
   Before  dawn  the  companions  took  up  the   hunt  again.   As  soon
 as  the  sun  rose  and  the  light  grew  they  climbed  the  downs and
 looked  out.  Already  the  dark  slopes  of   the  forest   of  Fangorn
 could   be   seen,   and   behind,   glimmering,   the  white   head  of
 Methen   Amon,   the   last   great   peak   of  the   Misty  Mountains.(7)
      Out of the forest flowed the river to meet them. Legolas looked

 round,  turning  his  gaze  through  west  to   south.  There   his  keen
 elf-eyes  saw  as  a  shadow  on   the  distant   green  a   dark  moving
 blur.                                                                    
   'There  are  folk  behind  as  well  as  in  front,' he  said, pointing
 away  over  the  river.  Trotter  bent his  ear to  the earth,  and there
 was  a  silence  in  the  empty  fields,  only  the  airs  moving  in the
 grass   could   be   heard.   'Riders,'   said   Trotter   rising:  'many
 horsemen  in  haste.   We  cannot   escape  in   this  wild   bare  land.
 Most  likely  it  is  a  host  of  the  Rohiroth  that  have  crossed the
 great   ford   at   Entwade.(8) But   what   part  the   Horsemasters  are
 minded  to  play  and  which  side  they  serve  I  do  not know.  We can
 but hope for the best.'                                                  
   The  companions  hastened  on  to   the  end   of  the   downs.  Behind
 them   now  they   could  hear   the  beat   of  many   hooves.  Wrapping
 their  cloaks  about  them  they  sat  upon  a  green  bank close  to the
 orc-trail  and  waited.  The  horsemen  grew  ever  nearer,  riding  like
 the   wind.   The   cries   of   clear  strong   voices  came   down  the
 following   breeze.   Suddenly   they   swept  up   with  a   noise  like
 thunder:  a  long  line  riding  free  many  abreast,  but  following the
 orc-trail,  or  so it  seemed, for  the leaders  rode bent  low, scanning
 the   ground   even   as  they   raced.  Their   horses  were   of  great
 stature...                                                               
                                                                         
   The  account  of  the  Riders  and  their  horses,  though  rougher  in
 expression, is very much as that in TT pp. 33-4,  and the  description in
 this original draft  of the  wheeling horses  suddenly halting  was never
 changed - except in the point that  'fifty lances  were at  rest pointing
 towards the strangers', where TT has 'a thicket  of spears'  (Legolas had
 counted one hundred  and five  Riders, p.  32).(9) -  The conclusion  of the
 primary  draft,  the  conversation  between  Eomer  and  Aragorn  in  its
 earliest form, ran thus:                                                 
                                                                         
   'Who are you, and what are you doing in this land?'  said the          
 rider, using the common speech of the West, in manner  and tone          
 like Boromir and the men of Minas Tirith.                                
   [Rejected immediately: 'I am Aragorn Elessar (written above:          
 Elfstone) son of Arathorn.](10) 'I am called  Trotter. I  come out          
 of the North,'  he replied,  'and with  me are  Legolas [added:          
 Greenleaf] the Elf and Gimli Gloin's son the Dwarf of  Dale. We          
 are hunting orcs. They have taken  captive other  companions of          
 ours.'                                                                   
   The rider lowered his spear-point and leaped from his horse,           
 and standing surveyed Trotter keenly and not without wonder.             
 At  length  he  spoke  again.  'At  first  I thought  you were  orcs,' he

 said, 'but that is not so. Indeed you know little about  them, if
 you  go  hunting  them  in  this  fashion.  They  are  swift  and
 well-armed, and there are  very many,  it is  said. You  would be
 likely to change from  hunter to  quarry, if  you ever  caught up
 with  them.  But  there  is something  strange about  you, Master
 Trotter.' He bent his clear  bright eyes  again upon  the ranger.
 'That is no name for a  man that  you give.  And strange  is your
 raiment - almost it seems as if you had sprung out of  the grass.
 How did you escape our sight?'                                  
   'Give me your name,  master of  horses, and  maybe I  will give
 you mine, and other news,' answered Trotter.                    
   'As  for  that,' said  the rider,  'I am  Eomer son  of Eomund,
 Third  Master  of  the  Riddermark.  Eowin  the Second  Master is
 ahead.'                                                         
   'And I am  Aragorn Elfstone  son of  Arathorn Tarkil,  the heir
 of Isildur Elendil's son of Ondor,' said Trotter. 'There  are not
 many  among  mortal  men  who  know  more  of  orcs. But  he that
 lacks a horse  must go  on foot,  and when  need presses  no more
 friends may a man take with him  than he  has at  hand. Yet  I am
 not unarmed.' He cast back his cloak: the  elven-sheath glittered
 and the bright blade of Branding shone like a sudden flame  as he
 swept it out. 'Elendil!' cried Trotter. 'See  the sword  that was
 broken and  is now  remade. As  for our  raiment, we  have passed
 through Lothlorien,' he said, 'and the favour of the Lady  of the
 Galadrim goes with us. Yet great is our need, as  is the  need of
 all  the  enemies of  Sauron in  these days.  Whom do  you serve?
 Will you  not help  us? But  choose swiftly:  both our  hunts are
 delayed.'                                                       
   'I  serve  the  Father  and  Master  of  the  Riddermark,' said
 Eomer.  'There  is  trouble upon  all our  borders, and  even now
 within  them.  Fear  which was  once a  stranger walks  among us.
 Yet we do not serve Sauron. Tribute he  seeks to  lay on  us. But
 we - we desire only to  be free,  and to  serve no  foreign lord.
 Guests  we will  welcome, but  the unbidden  robber will  find us
 swift and hard. Tell me [?briefly] what brings you here.'       
   Then Trotter in few words told him of  the assault  on Calenbel
 and  the  fall of  Boromir. Dismay  was plain  to see  on Eomer's
 face and many of his  men at  that news.  It seemed  that between
 Rohan  and  Ondor  there  was  great  friendship. Wonder  too was
 in the eyes of the riders when they learned that Aragorn  and his
 two  companions  had  come  all  the  way  from  Tolbrandir since
 the evening of the third day back on foot.                      

   'It  seems  that  the  name  of Trotter  was not  so ill  given,' said
 Eomer.  'That  you  speak the  truth, if  not all  the truth,  is plain.
 The   men   of  Rohan   speak  no   lies,  but   they  are   not  easily
 deceived.  But  enough  -  there  is  now  more   need  of   speed  than
 before.  We  were   hastening  only   to  aid   of  Eowin,   since  news
 came   back   that   the   orc-host  was   large  and   outnumbered  the
 pursuers,  but  twenty-five  that  we  first  sent.  But  if  there  are
 captives  to  rescue  we  must  ride  faster. There  is one  spare horse
 that  you  can  have,  Aragorn.  The  others  must  make  shift  to ride
 behind my two esquires.'                                                  
   Aragorn  leapt  upon  the  back  of  the  great  grey  horse  that was
 given to him.                                                             
                                                                          
   Here the primary draft A ends, and as my father broke off he noted:     
                                                                          
   This  complicates  things.  Trotter etc.  should meet  Eomer returning
   from  battle  north  of  the  Downs near  forest.... and  Eomer should
   [?deny] any captives.                                                   
    Trotter  learns  war  has  broken  out  with  Saruman  [?even]  since
   Gandalf s escape.(11)                                                   
                                                                          
   From  'Aragorn  and  his  two  companions  had come  all the  way from
 Tolbrandir since the evening of the third day back' the chronology at     
 this stage can be deduced:                                                
   Day 1. Death of Boromir. Leave Calenbel; night in Sarn Gebir.            
   Day 2. First day in plains of Rohan.                                     
   Day 3. Second day in plains of Rohan; reach downs in evening.            
   Day 4. In morning go on to northern end of downs; encounter with         
   Riders.                                                                 
 Despite the radical alteration in the story that now entered (the Riders
 were returning from battle with the Orcs, not on their way to it) this
 chronology was retained for a long time.                                  
                                                                          
   We  come  now  to  the  second version  'B'. This  text was  much worked
 on subsequently, but I mostly cite it as  it was  first written,  unless a
 change  seems  to  have  been  immediate.  It  was  now  that   my  father
 began to use 'Aragorn' again in place  of 'Trotter'  as the  ordinary name
 in narrative, though at first he still now and then wrote 'Trotter' out of
 habit before changing it immediately to 'Aragorn'.                        
   At  the  point  where in  TT 'The  Departure of  Boromir' ends  and 'The
 Riders of Rohan' begins the text reads thus:                              
                                                                          
   'We  have  no  time  now  for  wariness,'   said  Aragorn.   'Dusk  will
 soon  be  about  us.  We  must  trust  to  the  shadows  and  our  cloaks,
 and   hope  for   a  change   of  luck.'   He  hastened   forward,  hardly
 pausing in  his stride  to scan  the trail;  for it  needed little  of his
 skill to find.                                                            

               
                                                                             
  'It  is  well  that  the  orcs  do  not  walk  with  the  care  of  their
 captives,'  said  Legolas,  as  he  leaped   lightly  behind.   'At  least
 such  an  enemy  is  easy   to  follow.   No  other   folk  make   such  a
 trampling.   Why   do   they   slash   and  beat   down  all   the  growing
 things  as  they  pass?   Does  it   please  them   to  break   plants  and
 saplings that are not even in their way?'                                     
  'It   seems   so,'   answered   [Trotter   >]   Aragorn;  'but   they  go
 with a great speed for all that. And they do not tire.'                      
  In  both  we  may   prove  their   equals,  said   Gimli.  But   on  foot
 we cannot hope to overtake their start, unless they are hindered.'           
  'I  know  it,'  said  Aragorn;  'yet  follow  we  must,  as best  we can.
 And  may  be  that  better  fortune  awaits  us  if  we  come   down  into
 Rohan.  But  I  do  not   know  what   has  happened   in  that   land  in
 late   years,   nor   of   what   mind  the   Horse-Masters  may   now  be
 between   the   traitor   Saruman   and   the   threat  of   Sauron.  They
 have  long  been  friends  with  the  people  of   Ondor  and   the  lords
 of  Minas  Tirith,  though  they  are  not  akin to  them. After  the fall
 of   Isildur   they   came  out   of  the   North  beyond   Mirkwood,  and
 their  kinship  is  rather  with  the  Brandings,  the  Men  of  Dale, and
 with  the  Beornings  of  the  woods,  among  whom   still  may   be  seen
 many  Men,  tall  and  fair,  like  the  Riders  of  Rohan.  At  the least
 they will not love the Orcs or aid them willingly.'(12)                      
  Dusk  deepened.   Mist  lay   behind  them   among  the   trees  below...
                                                                             
  Here  in  TT  the  chapter  'The   Riders  of   Rohan'  begins,   and  this
 earliest extant text is already very close to it in the  story of  the night
 spent scrambling on  the ridges  and in  the gullies  of Sern-gebir  (as the
 name is written at  this point)  and the  discovery of  the slain  Orcs. The
 Rohirrim  are  still  the  Rohiroth,   Gondor  is   Ondor,  and   the  White
 Mountains  are  the  Black  Mountains  (described  in  precisely   the  same
 words as in TT p. 24, and as there distant 'thirty leagues or more').        
                                                                             
  Aragorn's verse took this form:                                             
                                                                             
                           (Aragorn sings a stave)                            
 Ondor! Ondor! Between the Mountains and the Sea                              
 Wind blows, moon rides, and the light upon the Silver Tree                  
 Falls like rain there in gardens of the King of old.                         
 O white walls, towers fair, and many-footed throne of gold!                  
 O Ondor, Ondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree                             
 Or West Wind blow again between the Mountain fs J and the Sea?               
                                                                             
 It  can be  made out  from the  erased primary  text A  that this  verse was
 not present,  but only  Aragorn's words  that precede  it. In  this earliest
 form  many-footed  throne  of  gold  was  changed,  probably  very  soon, to

 winged crown and throne of gold as in TT. These are the first             
 references to the Winged Crown and the White Tree of Gondor.(13)           
   Then follows (as originally written):                                    
                                                                           
   The ridge fell steeply  before their  feet: twenty  fathoms or           
 more it stood above  the wide  shelf below.  Then came  the edge           
 of a sheer cliff: the East Wall of Rohan.  So ended  Sarn Gebir,           
 and the green fields of the Horsemasters rolled against its feeg           
 like a grassy sea. Out of the high land  fell many  freshets and           
 threadlike waterfalls, springing down to feed the wandering                
 Entwash,  and  carving  the  grey  rock  of the  escarpment into           
 countless crannies and narrow clefts. For a breathing space the,           
 three companions  stood, rejoicing  in the  passing of  night, '           
 feeling the first warmth of the mounting sun pierce the chill of           
 their limbs.                                                               
   'Now let us  go!' said  Aragorn, drawing  his eyes  of longing           
 away  from  the south,  and looking  out west  and north  to the           
 way that he must go.                                                       
   'See!' cried Legolas, pointing to the pale sky above  the blur           
 where the Forest of Fangorn lay far across the plains. 'See! The           
 eagle is come again. Look! He is high, but he is  coming swiftly           
 down. Down he comes! Look!'                                                
   'Not even my eyes can see him, my good Legolas,' said                    
 Aragorn. 'He must be away upon the very confines of the forest.            
 But I can see something nearer at hand and more urgent...'                 
                                                                           
 On  previous references  to the  descending eagle  see p.  385. Subsequent-
 ly my father pencilled in against this passage:                            
                                                                           
 Eagle   should   be  flying   from  Sarn   Gebir,  bearing   Gandalf  from
 Tolbrandir   where  he   resisted  the   Eye  and   saved  Frodo?   If  so
 substitute the following:                                                  
   'Look!'  said  Legolas,  pointing  up  in  the  pale  sky  above  them.
 'There  is  the  eagle  again.  He  is very  high. He  seems to  be flying
 from   Sarn    Gebir   now    back   northward.    He   is    going   back
 northward. Look! '                                                         
   'No,  not  even  my   eyes  can   see  him,   my  good   Legolas,'  said
 Aragorn.  'He  must  be   far  aloft   indeed.  I   wonder  what   is  his
 errand,  if  he  is  the same  bird that  we have  seen before.  But look'
 I can see something'                                                       
                                                                           
 This is virtually the text of TT (p. 25); and it is curious to see what its
 meaning  was when  it was  first written  - that  Gandalf was  passing high
 above  their  heads.  The  eagle  was  flying  to  Fangorn  (and  therefore
 north-west  rather than  north), whereas  in TT  Gandalf explains  later to

 Legolas (pp. 98 -  9) that  he had  sent the  eagle, Gwaihir  the Windlord,
 'to watch  the  River and  gather tidings:  Gwaihir had  told him  of the
 captivity of Merry  and Pippin.(14) Against the  suggestion here  that the
 eagle  was  carrying  Gandalf  from  Tol Brandir  'where he  resisted the
 Eye and saved Frodo' my father wrote w o in large letters; cf. TT  p. 99:
 'I  sat  in  a high  place, and  I strove  with the  Dark Tower;  and the
 Shadow passed.' Nonetheless he preserved the new text.                   
                                                                         
   In TT (pp. 25 - 6) the  three companions  followed the  Orc-trail north
 along the escarpment to the ravine where a path  descended like  a stair,
 and followed the trail down into the plain. In the present text the story
 is different:                                                            
                                                                         
 ...a  rough  path   descended  like   a  broad   steep  stair   into  the
 plain.  At  the  top  of  the  ravine  Aragorn   stopped.  There   was  a
 shallow  pool  like  a  great  basin,  over  the  worn  lip of  which the
 water  spilled:  lying  at  the  edge of  the basin  something glistening
 caught  his  eye.  He  lifted  it out  and held  it up  in the  light. It
 looked   like   the   new-opened   leaf   of   a  beech-tree,   fair  and
 untimely in the winter morning.                                          
   'The   brooch   of   an   elven-cloak!'   cried   Legolas   and   Gimli
 together,  and  each  with  his  hand  felt  for  the  clasp  at  his own
 throat; but none of their brooches were missing.                         
   'Not   lightly   do   the   leaves  of   Lorien  fall,'   said  Aragorn
 solemnly.  'This  clasp  did  not   betray  its   owner,  nor   stray  by
 chance.  It  was  cast  away:  maybe   to  mark   the  point   where  the
 captors turned from the hills.'                                          
   'It may have been stolen by an orc and dropped,' said Gimli.           
   'True  enough,' said  Legolas, 'but  even so  it tells  us that  one at
 least of our Company was carried off as Boromir said.'                   
   'It   may   tell   no   more  than   that  one   of  our   Company  was
 plundered,' answered Gimli.                                              
   Aragorn   turned   the  brooch   over.  The   underside  of   the  leaf
 Was  of  silver.  'It  is  freshly marked,'  he said.  'With some  pin or
 Sharp  point  it  has  been  scored.(15) See!  A hand  has scratched  on it
 (...).'                                                                   
   The  others  looked  at  the  faint  letters  eagerly. 'They  were both
 alive  then  so  far,  said  Gimli.   That  is   heartening.  We   do  not
 pursue  in  vain.  And  one at  least had  a hand  free: that  is strange
 and perhaps hopeful.'                                                    
   'But  the   Ringbearer  was   not  here,'   said  Aragorn.   'At  least
 so we  may  guess.  If  I   have  learned   anything  of   these  strange
 hobbits,  I   would  swear   that  otherwise   either  Merry   or  Pippin

 would have put F first, and F alone if time allowed no more. But          
 the choice is made. We cannot turn back.'                                 
   The  three  companions climbed  down the  ravine. At  its foot          
 they came with a strange suddenness upon the grass of Rohan.              
                                                                          
 I think that it was here,  arising out  of this  moment in  the narrative,
 that  the  leaf-brooches  of  Lorien  were   conceived;  they   were  then
 written into the fair copy manuscript  of 'Farewell  to Lorien'  (p. 285).
 But  it  is  strange that  Aragorn should  speak as  though the  brooch was
 at last a clear  if not  altogether final  evidence that  Frodo was  not a
 captive of the Orcs, for in drafting  for 'The  Departure of  Boromir' (p.
 386) he had said: 'One thing at least is clear. Frodo is no longer on this
 side  of  the River.  Only he  could or  would have  taken the  boat'; and
 that he should feel that this  evidence called  for some  reinforcement of
 the  decision  to pursue  the Orcs.  - The  postponement of  the discovery
 of Pippin's brooch to  its place  in TT  (p. 26)  was introduced  not long
 afterwards in a rider; see p. 408.                                        
   The entire account in TT from the debate at nightfall  of the  first day
 in the  plains of  Rohan (27  February: the  second day  of the  chase) to
 their setting off again on the following morning (pp. 27  - 9)  is lacking
 here. The text reads thus:                                                
                                                                          
 ... No longer could any sight of them be seen in the level plains.        
   When  night  was  already  far  advanced  the   hunters  rested   for  a
 while,   somewhat   less   than   three  hours.   Then  again   they  went
 on,  all  the  next  day  with  scarcely  a  pause.  Often   they  thanked
 the  folk  of  Lorien  for  the  gift of  lembas; for  they could  eat and
 find new strength even as they ran.                                       
   As  the  third  day  [i.e.  of  the  chase]  wore on  they came  to long
 treeless  slopes,  where  the  ground  was  harder   and  drier   and  the
 grass   shorter:   the   land   rose,  now   sinking  now   swelling  up,,
 towards  a  line  of  low,  smooth   downs  ahead.   To  their   left  the
 river  Entwash  wound,   a  silver   thread  in   the  green   floor.  The
 dwellings   of   the   Rohiroth   were   for  the   most  part   far  away
 [south  >]  to  the  west (16) across  the  river,  under  the  wooded  eaves
 of   the   Black   Mountains,   which   were  now   hidden  in   mist  and
 cloud.   Yet   Aragorn   wondered  often   that  they   saw  no   sign  of
 beast   or   man,   for   the   Horsemasters   had   formerly   kept  many
 studs   and   herds   in   this    eastern   region    (Eastemnet),(17) and
 wandered   much,   living   often   in   camp   or   tent,  even   in  the
 winter-time.  But  all  the  land  was   now  empty,   and  there   was  a
 silence  upon  it  that  did  not  seem   to  be   the  quiet   of  peace.
 Through   the   wide   solitude   the   hunters   passed.   Their   elven-
 cloaks faded against the background of the green fields...                

                                          
                                                                             
 It  is at  this point  that the  original text  A emerges  (p. 391).  The new
 version  B,  still replacing  it but  no longer  destroying it,  advances far
 towards  the  final text,  and for  long stretches  is almost  identical. The
 original  time-scheme,  as  set  out on  p. 394,  was retained:  the three
 companions  still  came  to the  downs at  the end  of the  third day  of the
 chase  (i.e.  the  second  day  in   the  plains   of  Rohan);   Aragorn  still
 asserted  that  the  tracks  which  they  found  there  had  been  made  that
 day; and  they still  went on  far into  the night,  not stopping  until they
 were   halfway    along   the    downs,   where    they   found    the   orc-
 encampment.  In this  version, in  fact, the  Orcs were  less far  ahead than
 they were in  A: '  "They halted  here in  the early  evening, I  guess," said
 Aragorn.'  It  was  at  this  point  that  Aragorn  lay on  the ground  for a
 long  time motionless  (cf. TT  pp. 28  - 9;  but here  it was  by moonlight,
 in the night following  'Day 3'  of the  chase, not  at dawn  of 'Day  3' and
 gill far east of the downs).                                                 
                                                                             
               'The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,' he said. 'Many
 ' feet I heard, far away; but it seemed to me also that there were           
 horses, horses galloping,  and yet  all were  going away  from us.           
 I wonder  what is  happening in  this land.  All seems  strange. I           
 distrust the very moonlight. Only the stars are left to  steer by,           
 and they are faint and far away. I  am weary,  as a  Ranger should           
 never be on a fresh trail; yet we must go on, we must go on.'                
                                                                             
 In  this  version  they  seem  not  to have  slept at  all that  night: 'when
 dawn  came  they  had  almost  reached  the end  of the  downs'; and  'as the
 sun  rose  upon  the  fourth day  of the  pursuit, and  the light  grew, they
 climbed  the  last  height, a  rounded hill  standing alone  at the  north end
 of  the  downs -  where in  TT (p.  31) they  spent the  night of  the fourth
 day.(18)                                                                     
                                                                             
   The  coming  of  the  Rohiroth  now  reaches  the  text  of  TT,(19) and  the
 only  difference  to mention  is that  Legolas, seeing  them far  away, said:
 'There  are  one  hundred  save  three'; this  almost certainly  indicates, I
 think,  that  three Riders  had been  lost from  an eored  of 100  horse. But
 'one  hundred  save  three'  was  changed  to 'one  hundred and  five' before
 the end  of   the  chapter   was  reached,   for  Eomer   subsequently  tells
 Aragorn  that   they  had   lost  fifteen   men  in   the  battle.   (On  the
 constitution of an eored see Unfinished Tales p. 315.)                       
   The  first  part  of  Aragorn's conversation  with Eomer  in B  is actually
 a third version, for it is written over erased pencil drafting, as far as the
 Point   where   Gimli   explains   to   Eomer   the   meaning  of   the  word
 'hobbits' (TT  p. 37);  and here  the final  form is  reached apart  from one
 or  two  details:  Branding  as  the  name  of  Aragorn's sword,  Masters for
 Marshals  of  the  Mark.  It  is  here  that  Theoden  son  of  Thengel first
 appears:  if  some  other  names  preceded  these  they   are  lost   in  the

  underlying erased text. Theoden is not here called 'King', but  'the First
  Master'.                                                                  
    For  the  next  portion  of  the  chapter there  is some  extremely rough
  drafting, scarcely more than notes, preliminary  to the  writing of  B. In
  these  my father  did not  see Gandalf  as a  well-known figure  in Rohan,
  and  he  still  thought that  there was  another troop  of Riders  in that
  region (detached from Eomer's host?):                                     
                                                                           
    The  old  man  who  said  he  had  escaped  from  Orthanc  on   an  eagle!
    And  demanded  a  horse  and  got  it!  Some  said  he  was a  wizard. And
    Shadowfax... [?came back] only a day ago.                               
       Eomer   says   some   orcs   fled  towards   Wold.  Aragorn   may  meet
    other  Riders: Marhath  the Fourth  Master [see  p. 390]  is there  with a
    few  men.  Aragorn  wishes  to  go  on.  Eomer  gives  him  token  to show
    Marhath.   Aragorn   pledges   his   word   to   return  to   Theoden  and
    vindicate Eomer. Farewell.                                              
                                                                           
    In the part of the  B-text developed  from these  notes the  hobbits are
  called the 'Half-high', not as in TT the 'Halflings': in Gimli's reference
  to  'the words  that troubled  Minas Tirith'  he says  'They spoke  of the
  Half-high', as  in the  form of  the verse  in the  fifth version  of 'The
  Council  of  Elrond (p.  146).(20) Aragorn  s reply  to the  scoffing question
  of Eothain 'Are we  walking in  legends or  on the  green earth  under the
  daylight?' here takes the form: 'One may do  both; and  the latter  is not
  always the safer'  (added to  the manuscript:  'But the  green earth  is a
  legend  seen  under  the light  of day').  Eomer's remarks  about Gandalf,
  which  were  achieved  in  this  form  through  a  mass of  small changes,
  now read thus:                                                            
                                                                           
    'Gandalf?'  said  Eomer.  'We  have  heard  of  him.   An  old   man  of
  that   name   used   to   appear  at   times  in   our  land.   None  knew
  whence   he   came   or   where  he   went.  His   coming  was   ever  the
  herald  of  strange  events.  Indeed  since  his  last  coming  all  things
  have   gone   amiss.   Our   trouble   with   Saruman  began   from  that.
  time.   Until   then   we   had   counted   Saruman   our    friend,   but
  Gandalf  said  that  evil  was  afoot  in  Isengard.  Indeed   he  declared
  that  he  had  been  a  prisoner  in  Orthanc  and  had   escaped.  Riding
  on  an  eagle!  Nonetheless  he  asked  us  for  a  horse!  What  arts  he
  used  I  cannot  guess,  but  Theoden   gave  him   one  of   the  mearas:
  the  steeds  that  only  the First  Master of  the Mark  may ride;  for it
  is  said  that  [they  are  descended  from  the  horses  which   the  Men
  of  Westernesse  brought  over  the  Great  Seas   >]  their   sires  came
  out  of  the  Lost  Land  over  the  Great  Sea  when  the  Kings  of  Men
  came  out   of  the   Deeps  to   Gondor.  Shadowfax   was  the   name  of
  that  horse.  We  wondered  if  evil  had  befallen   the  old   man;  for
  seven nights ago Shadowfax returned.'(21)                                 

             
                                                                         
  'But  Gandalf   left  Shadowfax   far  in   the  North   at  Rivendell,'
 said  Aragorn.  'Or   so  I thought.(22) But,   alas,  however   that  may
 be,  Gandalf  is  gone  down   into  the   shadows.'  Aragorn   now  told
 briefly  the  story  of  their  journey  from  Moria.  To his  account of
 Lorien   Eomer   listened   with   amazement.   At  last   Aragorn  spoke
 of the assault of the orcs on Calen-bel, and the fall of Boromir.        
                                                                         
 Only shortly before in this text  the name  was still  Ondor. In  view of
 the fact that it is Ondor in the draft and fair  copy of  'Treebeard', it
 may be that the alteration  of the  sentence about  the mearas,  in which
 the  form  Gondor  appears, was  made later.  On the  actual date  of the
 change Ondor ) Gondor see p. 423.                                        
  In  the  remainder  of  the  conversation  with  Eomer  there  are  only
 these differences from the text of TT (pp. 38-41) to notice. There  is no
 suggestion  yet  of  Wormtongue:  Eomer  does not  speak of  'some, close
 to the king's ear, that speak craven  counsels'. He  says that  there has
 been  war  with  Saruman  'since  the  summer'  ('for many  months', TT);
 and  he  remarks  of Saruman  himself that  'He walks  about like  an old
 man,  indeed there  are some  that say  Gandalf was  only old  Saruman in
 disguise: certainly they are much  alike to  look on.'(23) In his  account of
 his own  present expedition  Eomer does  not refer  to his  going without
 Theoden's leave:                                                         
                                                                         
 '...  I do  not know  how it  all will  end. There  is battle  even now
 away   upon   the   Westemnet   under    the   shadow    of   Isengard.
 Hardly  could  we  be  spared.  But  scouts   warned  us   [>  Theoden]
 of  the  orc-host  coming  down  out  of  the  East  Wall  three nights
 ago:  among  them  they  reported   some  that   bore  the   badges  of
 Saruman.  We  overtook  them  yesterday  at  nightfall,  only  a little
 way  from  the   edges  of   the  Forest.   We  surrounded   them,  and
 gave  battle  at  dawn.  We  lost  fifteen  of  my  eored   and  twelve
 horses, alas!'                                                           
                                                                         
 On  the  chronology  see  the  Note  on  Chronology  at  the end  of this
 chapter. Eomer tells of the Orcs that came  in from  the East  across the
 Great  River, and  the Isengard  Orcs that  came out  of the  Forest. The
 story of the finding of Pippin's brooch was still in its former place (p.
 397), as is  seen from  Aragorn's words  here: 'Yet  our friends  are not
 behind. We  had a  clear token  that they  were with  the Orcs  when they
 descended into the plain.'(24)                                           
  At the end of the conversation Eomer says:                              
                                                                         
 '...  But  it  is  hard to  be sure  of anything  among so  many marvels.
 One   may  pardon   Eothain,  my   squire.  The   world  is   all  turned
 strange.   Old   men  upon   eagles;  and   raiment  that   deceives  the
 eye;  and  Elves  with  bows,  and  folk  that   have  spoken   with  the

 Lady  of  the  Wood,  and  yet  live;  and  the   Sword  comes   back  to
 war  that  was  broken  ere  the  Fathers  of the  Fathers rode  into the
 Mark!  How  shall  a  man  judge  what  to  do  in  such  times.   It  is
 against  our  law  to  let  strangers  wander  free  in  our   land,  and
 doubly   so  at   this  time   of  peril.   I  beg   you  to   come  back
 honourably with me, and you will not.'                                    
                                                                          
 Aragorn in his reply tells (as in TT  p. 41)  that he  had been  in Rohan,
 and  had  spoken  with  Eomund   father  of   Eomer,  and   with  Theoden,
 and  with  Thengel  that  was  Master  before  him.  None  of  them  would
 have  desired  to  force  a  man  to  abandon  friends  whom the  orcs had
 seized,  while   hope  or   even  doubt   remained.'  Eomer   relents.  He
 requests  that  Aragorn  return  with  the  horses  over  the  Entwade  to
 '...  torras  where  Theoden  now  sits.'  This name  was changed  at once
 or   very   soon   to   Meodarn,  Meduarn   ('Mead-hall'),  and   then  to
 'Winseld  ['Wine-hall'],  the  high  house  in  Eodor.'  Eodor  (singular,
 fence,  enclosure,  dwelling  )  is  seen  on  Map  IV (p.  317),. Eodoras
 (plural)  on Map  IV(D-E) (p.  319). Eothain's  surliness at  the loan  of the
 horses  is  not  present.  The  horses  were first  given names  in Modern
 English,  that  for  Aragorn  being  'Windmane'   and  that   for  Legolas
 'Whitelock';  these  were  changed  to  the  Old  English  names  found in
 TT, Hasofel ('Grey-coat', cf. Hasupada, note 21) and Arod ('Swift').      
                                                                          
   In the last part of the chapter, after the Riders had gone, the story is
 for most of its length at once almost as in the final text; but Aragorn's
 words about Fangorn, the earliest account of it that my father wrote,(25) 
 took this form:                                                           
                                                                          
   'I   do   not   know   what   fables   men   have   made   out   of  old
 knowledge,'   said   Aragorn.   'And   of   the   truth   little   is  now
 known,  even  to  Keleborn.  But  I  have  heard  tell  that  in  Fangorn,
 clinging  here  on  the  east  side  of  the  last  slopes  of  the  Misty
 Mountains,   the   ancient   trees   have    taken   refuge    that   once
 marched  dark  and   proud  over   the  wide   lands,  before   even  the
 first  Elves  awoke  in  the   world.  Between   the  Baranduin   and  the
 Barrowdowns  is  another  forest  of  old trees;  but it  is not  as great
 as  Fangorn.  Some  say  that  both  are  but  the  last   strongholds  of
 one   mighty   wood,   more   vast   than   Mirkwood   the   Great,   that
 held   under   its   dominion   all  the   countries  through   which  now
 flow  the   Greyflood  and   the  Baranduin;   others  say   that  Fangorn
 is not akin to the  Old Forest,  and that  its secret  is of  other kind.'
                                                                          
 This was rejected  at once  and replaced  by a  shorter passage,  close to
 Aragorn's words in TT  (p. 45),  though Elrond  is not  here cited  as his
 authority:  'Some  say  the  two  are  akin, the  last strongholds  of the

  mighty  woods of  the Elder  days, in  which the  Elves strayed,  when they
  first awoke.'                                                               
    At  the  end  of  the  chapter,  when  Gimli  was  watchman  and  all was
  silent, save that the tree rustled and that 'the horses, picketed  a little
  way  off,  stirred  now  and  again,'  the  old   man  appeared;   and  his
  apparition  and  disappearance  are  told  in precisely  the same  words as
  in TT, except that he was 'clad in rags', not in a great cloak, and his hat
  was  'battered',  not  'wide-brimmed'.  But  the  chapter  ended altogether
  differently.                                                               
                                                                            
  There  was  no  trace  of  him  to  be  found  near   at  hand;   and  they
  did  not  dare  to  wander  far  -  the  moon  was  hidden  in  cloud,  and
  the  night  was  very  dark.  [Struck  out:  The  horses   remained  quiet,
  and  seemed  to   feel  nothing   amiss.]  ?   The  horses   were  restive,
  straining  at  their  tether-ropes,  showing  the  whites  of  their  eyes.
  It was a little while before Legolas could quiet them.                     
    For   some   time   the   companions   discussed   this   strange  event.
  'It   was   Saruman,   of   that   I  feel   certain,'  said   Gimli.  'You
  remember   the   words   of   Eomer.   He   will   come   back,   or  bring
  more  trouble  upon  us.  I  wish  that  the  morning   were  not   so  far
  off.'                                                                      
    'Well,   in   the   meantime   there   is  nothing   we  can   do,'  said
  Aragorn,  'nothing  but  to  get  what  rest  we  can,  while we  are still
  allowed to rest. I will watch now for a while, Gimli.'                     
    The   night   passed   slowly,   but   nothing   further   happened,   in
  any   of   their   two-hour   watches.   The   old   man  did   not  appear
  again.                                                                     
                                                                            
    While  this  is  no  more than  a guess,  I suspect  that when  my father
  wrote  this  he  thought  that  it  was  Gandalf,  and  not   Saruman,  who
  stood so briefly in the  light of  the fire  (cf. the  outline given  on p.
  389).(26)                                                                  

                            NOTES.                                   
                                                                    
 1. Sarn-Gebir runs North-South: see Map IV, pp. 317 - 18.         
 2. This means that the eagle was seen in the direction of Fangorn;
    see p. 396.                                                      
 3. I forgot most of what I knew: cf. TT p. 98.                       
 4. Haradwaith is here the name of a  people: see  p. 434,  and cf.
    Enedwaith,  rendered  'Middlemarch'  on  the  First Map  (Map II,
    p. 305), but afterwards (while  remaining the  name of  a region)
    'Middle-folk.'                                                   
 5. On  Mar-  and  Eo-  names  in  Rohan  see  Unfinished Tales  p. 311
    note 6 and p. 315 note 36. - Names  in Eo-  are not  written with
    an accent at this period.                                        

                                       
                                                                       
  6. None of the successive  variants of  this section  of the  First Map
     illustrate this.                                                   
  7. Methen  Amon:  earliest  name  of  Methedras  -  which   appears  on
     the  First  Map  (Map  IV,  p.  319).  For  Methen  see  the Etymol-
     ogies, V.373, stem MET: Noldorin methen 'end'; and see note 18.
  8. This is the first occurrence of the name Entwade  in the  texts: see
     p. 366, note 16.                                                   
  9. Aragorn  does  not  (of  course)  cry  out:   What  news   from  the
     North, Riders of Rohan?'; it is said only that he 'hailed them  in a
     loud voice.'                                                       
 10. This  is  the  first occurrence  of the  name Arathorn  of Aragorn's
     father,  replacing  earlier  Kelegorn  (cf.  also  Eldakar  p.  360,
     Valatar p. 362).                                                   
 11. Gandalf's escape from Orthanc.                                     
 12. This passage is found later in TT  (p. 33).  The reference  there to
     Eorl the  Young is  here absent;  and the  Brandings of  Dale (named
     from King Brand son  of Bain  son of  Bard) are  in TT  the Bardings
     (which was added to the First Map, p. 307). See note 19.           
 13. In a design of my father's for the cover of The  Return of  the King
     the throne is shown with four feet. This design, in white,  gold and
     green  on  a  black  ground shows  (as he  noted) 'the  empty throne
     awaiting  return  of  the  King'   with  outstretching   wings;  the
     Winged  Crown;  the  white-flowering  Tree,  with  seven  stars; and
     dimly seen beyond in the darkness a  vision of  the fall  of Sauron.
     This  design,  in simplified  form, was  used for  the cover  of the
     India paper edition of  The Lord  of the  Rings published  by George
     Allen and Unwin in 1969.                                           
 14. Yet Gandalf had himself been in, or over,  those regions,  it seems:
     'No, I did not find them. There was a darkness  over the  valleys of
     the Emyn Muil,  and I  did not  know of  their captivity,  until the
     eagle told me.'                                                    
 15. Altered later to: 'It has been scored with the pin, which  is broken
     off.' - An error in the text of  TT may  be mentioned  here. Aragorn
     did not say (p. 26) that  Pippin was  smaller than  the other'  - he
     would  not  refer  to Merry  in such  a remote  tone -  but 'smaller
     than    the    others',    i.e.   Merry    and   Frodo    and   Sam.
 16. to the west: subsequently changed back to to the south.            
 17. This is the first  occurrence in  the texts  of the  name Eastemnet,
     which  is  found  on  the  First  Map  (Map  IV, p.  319). Westemnet
     occurs later in this text (p. 401).                                
 18. Here,  as  they  looked  about them,  they saw  to their  right 'the
     windy  uplands  of  the  Wold  of  Rohan',  and  beyond  Fangorn the
     last  great  peak  of  the  Misty  Mountains  (first   named  Methen
     Amon,  p.  391  and  note  7),  Methendol,  immediately  changed  to
     Methedras.                                                         
 19. The  passage  in  which  Aragorn tells  Gimli what  he knows  of the

               
                                                                        
      Riders  of  Rohan  (TT  p.  33),  which  had  first   appeared  much
      earlier in B  (p. 395),  was transferred  subsequently to  the place
      that it occupies in  TT on  an inserted  rider. This  retains almost
      exactly the form in which it was first  written, without  mention of
      Eorl the Young, but with Bardings for Brandings.                   
  20. In  the  preliminary  drafting  the  Old   English  form   is  used:
      Halfheah (Halfheh, Heal fheh).                                     
  21. A  pencilled  rider  was  inserted  into the  manuscript later  as a
      substitute for this speech: here  the origin  of the  mearas remains
      the same, but in other respects the text of  TT is  largely reached:
      Gandalf  (not  yet  called   Greyhame)  is   murmured  by   some  in
      Rohan to be a bringer of ill, Theoden is called King, and  his anger
      against  Gandalf  for  taking  Shadowfax  and  the  horse's wildness
      after his return appear.  By an  addition to  the rider  Eomer says:
      'We  know  that  name,  or  Gondelf as  we have  it.' Gondelf  is an
      'Anglo-Saxonising' of Norse Gandalf(r). At the foot  of the  page is
      written  the  Old  English  word  Hasupada  ('Grey-coat'),   and  it
      appears from a subsequent typescript text of  the chapter  that this
      refers  to  Gandalf  (  Greyhame  ): ' " Gandalf!"  said  Eomer. <We
      know  that  name,  and   the  wandering   witega  that   claims  it.
      Hasupada  we  call  him  mostly  in   our  tongue" '   (Old  English
      witega 'wise man, one who has knowledge').                         
  22. On Shadowfax at  Rivendell and  after see  pp. 390  and 438  note 2.
  23. Eomer  calls  Saruman  'a  wizard  of  great  power', changed  to 'a
      wizard and man of craft', and that  to 'a  wizard and  very crafty'.
      Against   the  word   wizard  is   pencilled  wicca   (Old  English,
      'wizard', surviving at any rate until recently as  witch, masculine,
      not  distinct  in  form from   witch deriving  from the  Old English
      feminine wicce).                                                   
  24. These  words  are  in  themselves  ambiguous,  but  what  my  father
      intended  is  shown,  I  think,  by  the  fact  that  he  afterwards
      corrected  them  on the  manuscript to  'We had  a clear  token that
      one at least was still with the orcs  not far  from the  East Wall.'
      The original story was still present when he  wrote the  outline for
      the next chapter.                                                  
  25. If  the  very  early  images,  when  Treebeard was  a Giant  and his
      forest correspondingly gigantic (VI.382 - 4, 410), are excepted.
  26. Other supports, admittedly slight, for this idea are  the statements
      that the old man was 'clad in  rags' (cf.  Trotter's vision  on Amon
      Hen, p. 380);  that he  had a  'battered hat'  (cf. Frodo's  song in
      Lorien, FR p. 375:  an old  man in  a battered  hat); and  that 'the
      horses remained quiet, and seemed to  feel nothing  amiss.' -  It is
      curious that Aragorn's  words in  TT, p.  46 (when  the old  man was
      certainly  Saruman,  TT p.  102) 'I  marked also  that this  old man
      had  a  hat  not  a hood'  were an  addition to  the text  made long
      after.                                                              

                        Note on the Chronology.                      
                                                                    
 'The Riders of Rohan' is unusual in that  the narrative  underwent an
 important change in structure long after  it was  to all  intents and
 purposes completed.                                                 
  I set out below the relations between the time-scheme in  the second
 text (B) and that in The Two Towers. 'Day 1' is the day  of Boromir's
 death.                                                              

               Text B.             
  Day 1. Orcs descend into plains
         of Rohan at night.        
  Day 2. Aragorn &c. descend into
        Rohan in the morning.      
        First day in  the plains.
  Day 3. Second day in the plains.
        Aragorn   &c.    reach   the
        downs  in  the  evening  and
        go  on  through  the  night.
        -  Riders  overtake  Orcs at
        nightfall.                 
 Day 4. Battle of Riders and Orcs
        at dawn. - Aragorn &c.
        reach northmost hill of
        the downs at dawn.         
        Encounter with Riders      
        returning in the morning.
                                  
 Day 5.                            

          The Two Towers.        
 (Feb. 26)  The same.            
                               
 (Feb. 27)  The same.            
                               
 (Feb.  28) Aragorn  &c. approach
       downs   in   the   evening
       and  halt  for  the night.
       -  Riders   overtake  Orcs
       at nightfall.            
                               
 (Feb. 29) Battle of Riders and
       Orcs at dawn. -          
       Aragorn &c. reach       
       downs towards noon.      
       Night spent on           
       northmost hill of the
       downs.                   
 (Feb. 30) Aragorn &c.         
       encounter Riders         
       returning in the         
       morning.                 

    In  B,  Aragorn,  Legolas  and  Gimli  took  two  days  and  two  nights
  after their descent from the 'East Wall' to reach the isolated hill at the
  northern end  of the  downs where  they met  the Riders;  in TT  they took
  three days and two  nights to  reach that  place, and  passed the  third 
  night  there.  In  B,  they  encountered  the  Riders  returning   in  the
  morning  after  the  battle  at  dawn;  in  TT  the  meeting  was  on  the
  following day: the  Riders had  passed a  whole further  day and  night by
  the eaves of Fangorn before setting off south again.                      
    This  change  in  the  chronology, with  very substantial  rewriting and
  reordering (TT pp. 27 ff.) of the existing chapter, was introduced in     
  October 1944. On 12 October my father wrote a letter to me in South       
  Africa in which he said (Letters no. 84):                                 
                                                                           
      I began trying to write again (I would, on the brink of term!) on     

 Tuesday, but  I struck  a most  awkward error  (one or  two days)  in the
 synchronization,  v.  important  at  this  stage,  of movements  of Frodo
 and  the  others,  which  has cost  labour and  thought and  will require
 tiresome small alterations in many chapters...                           
                                                                         
 Four days later he wrote again (Letters no. 85):                          
                                                                         
 I  have  been  struggling  with  the dislocated  chronology of  the Ring,
 which has  proved most  vexatious ...  I think  I have  solved it  all at
 last  by  small  map  alterations,  and  by  inserting  an   extra  day's
 Entmoot,  and  extra  days  into  Trotter's   chase  and   Frodo's  jour-
 ney...                                                                   
                                                                         
 (On the extra day of the Entmoot see p. 419.)                            
 In  one  point  however  the text  of TT  retains an  uncorrected vestige
 of the original story. Eomer tells  Aragorn (p.  39) that  'scouts warned
 me of the orc-host coming down out of the East  Wall three  nights ago,'
 just as he does in the B text (p. 401).  But in  B this  was said  on the
 morning of Day 4, and the reference is to the night  of Day  1; in  TT it
 was said  on the  morning of  Day 5.  It was  therefore not  three nights
 ago, but four, that the Orcs came down from the Emyn Muil.               
                                                                         
 In The Tale of Years in Appendix B to LR the dates are:                  
 Feb. 26. Eomer hears of the descent of the Orc-band from the Emyn         
          Muil.                                                           
 Feb. 27. Eomer sets out from Eastfold about midnight to pursue the        
          Orcs.                                                           
 Feb. 28. Eomer overtakes the Orcs.                                        
 Feb. 29. The Rohirrim attack at sunrise and destroy the Orcs.             
 Feb. 30. Eomer returning to Edoras meets Aragorn.                         
                                                                         
 Thus Eomer's 'three nights ago' in TT  cannot be  explained by  taking it
 to refer, not to the descent of the Orcs into Rohan, but to his receiving
 news of it.                                                              

                                        XXI                                
                                    THE URUK-HAI.                          
                                                                          
 For this chapter there exists, first, a brief outline as follows:         
                                                                          
    Some   want   to   go   North.  Some   say  ought   to  go   straight  to
   Mordor. The great orcs were ordered to go to Isengard.                  
    They  carry  prisoners.  Neither  of  them  are  the  One.  They  haven't
   got it.  Kill 'em.  But they're  hobbits. Saruman  said bring  any hobbit,
   alive.  Curse  Saruman.  Who  does  he  think  he  is?  A good  master and
   lord. Man's flesh to eat.                                               
    Fight  breaks  out.  Slain  orc  falls  on  top  of  Pippin   with  blade
   drawn. Pippin manages to cut wrist bands. Ties cord loosely again.      
    Isengarders  win.  Mordor  orcs  are  killed. They  start on.  [? Leader]
   called  Ugluk  [?leaves  them].  They  rouse  Merry,  give him  drink; cut
   ankle   bonds   and  drive   hobbits  with   whips.  Dark   night.  Pippin
   manages to unclasp brooch unseen.                                       
    They  get  into  plain.  Merry  and Pippin  made to  run till  they faint
   and fall. Orcs carry them.                                              
    Pippin  awakes  to  hear  horsemen.  Night....   Terror  of   orcs.  They
   run at great speed. Ugluk refuses to let hobbits be  slain or  cast aside.
   Horsemen  ride  up.  Ugluk  steals  off  [?  from  his   friends  seizing]
   hobbits.  But  a  horseman  rides  after  him.  Pippin  pulls  Merry  down
   flat  and  covers  him  with  cloak,  the horseman  rides past  and spears
   Ugluk. Merry and Pippin fly into forest.                                
                                                                          
 'Ugluk'  is  here  of  course  the  Mordor  Orc subsequently  called Grish-
 nakh. It is seen that  Pippin still  drops his  brooch before  the descent.
 into the plain (p. 401 and note 24).                                      
   For almost half of this chapter there is no initial drafting  extant, and
 this  is  largely  because  my father  again, as  in the  previous chapter,
 wrote a new version in  ink over  erased drafting  in pencil;  in addition,
 it seems that some initial  drafting on  separate pages  has been  lost. As
 far, then, as ' "Very well,"  said Ugluk'  (TT p.  54) the  earliest extant
 text is this second version or fair  copy, in  which the  story as  told in
 TT  was  reached  almost  down  to  the last  detail, with  relatively very
 little   subsequent   correction  and   addition.  The   manuscript  begins
 without title, but my father clearly saw  it as  a new  chapter, 'XXIV'.(1) A
 title, 'An Orc-raid', was written in later.                               
   The later story of Pippin's casting  aside his  brooch after  the descent
 into  the  plain  had  now   entered.  The   Orc-names  are   all  present:

 Lugbtirz,  Uruk-hai;  Ugluk  (leader  of  the  Isengarders),  Grishnak (so
 spelt), Lugdush. Ugluk does not use the  word Halflings  (TT p.  48), but
 calls them hobbits; he says 'We  are the  servants of  the old  Uthwit and
 the White Hand' (cf. TT  p. 49),  this being  Old English  upwita 'sage,
 philosopher, one of great learning'; and  he calls  the descent  into the
 plain  of  Rohan  the  Ladder  (changed   to  the   Stair:  TT   p.  50).
 Grishnak  does  not  name the  Nazgul (TT  p. 49),  but says  'The winged
 one awaits us northward on the east bank'.                               
   At the point where Pippin is given  the orc-draught  my father  wrote a
 brief outline in the body of the text:                                   
                                                                         
    Ugluk   smears   Merry's   wound.   He   cries   out.  Orcs   jeer.  But
   torment not the object. Merry recovers.                                
    Orcs  become  aware  of  pursuit  by  horsemen.  Merry  and   Pippin  do
   not know about horsemen; but perceive that orcs are afraid.            
    Grishnak  brings  a  small  company  of   Mordor-orcs  from   the  East.
   Ugluk  evidently  does  not  like  it.  He  asks why  the Nazgul  has not
   come  to  help  them. The  Nazgul is  not yet  permitted to  cross River:
   Sauron is keeping them for the War - and for another purpose.          
    Grishnak  brings  a  small  company  of   Mordor-orcs  from   the  East.
   what a mess you have got into! They fly to the Forest.                 
    When   surrounded  Grishnak   searches  Merry   and  Pippin   and  drags
   them  out  of  ring  of  horsemen.  He  is  slain,  and Merry  and Pippin
   passed over. They run into forest.                                     
    Adventure with Treebeard.                                             
                                                                         
   From  the  point  where  Ugluk  sends  the  'Northerners'  running  off
 towards the Forest (TT p. 54) initial  drafting is  extant, except  for a
 further passage  where my  father reverted  to the  method of  erasing it
 and writing a new version above. This  draft text,  dashed down  in faint
 pencil and extremely difficult to make out, is astonishingly close to the
 final form. I give a brief passage  in exemplification  (TT p.  56), where
 the draft text is not in fact so close to the final form as it is  in some
 others:                                                                  
                                                                         
 The   Forest  was   drawing  near.   Already  they   had  passed   a  few
 isolated  trees.   The  land   was  beginning   to  slope   upward,  ever
 more  steeply.  But  this  did  not  stay   the  orcs,   now  desperately
 putting  on  their  last  spurt.  Looking  to  one  side Pippin  saw that
 riders  coming  in  the  East  were  already  level  with   them,  gallop-
 ing  over  the  plain,  the  sunset  touching  their  spears  and helmets
 and   their  pale   flowing  hair.   They  were   hemming  in   the  orcs
 driving  them  along  the  line  of  the  river.  He  wondered  very much
 what sort of folk they were. He wished he had learned more in          
   Rivendell, looked at more maps - but then the journey was all          
 in more competent hands, he had not reckoned on being  cut off          

                              
                                                                            
 from Gandalf and Trotter - and even Frodo. All he could                     
 remember about them was that he  [read they]  had given                     
 Gandalf a horse. That [? sounded] well.                                     
                                                                            
 If the original drafting where it is extant is characteristic of the parts
 where it is not, as seems very probable, it can be said this chapter was
 achieved with far greater facility than any previous part of the story of
 The Lord of the Rings.                                                      
   The second version of the latter part of the chapter only differs in      
 very minor touches here and there from the final form.(2) The watchfires       
 of the Riders were a later addition to the text; Grishnakh (now so          
 spelt) had evidently had personal experience of Gollum, for he says,        
 'That's what he meanss, iss it?' (cf. TT p. 59); and at the point where     
 the chapter ends in TT this text has only:                                  
                                                                            
 There he was slain at last by Eomer the Third Master of Rohan,              
 who dismounted and  fought him  sword to  sword. So  ended the              
 raid, and no news of it came ever back either to Mordor  or to              
 Isengard.(3)                                                                
                                                                            
   Neither in the draft nor in the  second text  did my  father stop  at this
 point,   but  continued   on  into   the  following   chapter  in   The  Two
 Towers, 'Treebeard'.                                                        
                                                                            
                                    NOTES.                                   
                                                                            
   1.  The  manuscript is  paginated 'XXIV',  as also  is the  draft (with
       numbers written at the same time as the text).                        
   2.  The  Orc-names  Snaga  and  Mauhur appear  already in  the prelimi-
       nary draft.                                                           
   3.  The  expansion   of  the   end  of   the  chapter   came  in   with  the
       chronological revision  made in  October 1944  (see pp.  406 -  7). In
       notes on the subject my  father said  that 'at  end of  "Uruk-hai" the
       fight should be made to take longer - chase of stray fugitives, etc.',
       and that something should be said of the burning of the corpses.      

                                 XXII.                                 
                                TREEBEARD.                               
                                                                       
 Of  'Giant Treebeard'  there have  been many  mentions in  the outlines
 scattered through the early texts  of The  Lord of  the Rings,  but there
 was nothing in any of them to prepare  for the  reality when  he should
 finally appear. My father said years later (Letters no. 180,  14 January
 1956):                                                                 
                                                                       
  I have long  ceased to  invent ...:  I wait  till I  seem to  know what
  really happened.  Or till  it writes  itself. Thus,  though I  knew for
  years  that  Frodo  would  run  into  a  tree-adventure  somewhere  far
  down  the  Great River,  I have  no recollection  of inventing  Ents. I
  came at last to the point,  and wrote  the 'Treebeard'  chapter without
  any recollection of previous thought: just as it now is.              
                                                                       
 This testimony is fully borne out by the original text. 'Treebeard' did
 indeed very largely 'write itself'.                                    
                                                                       
  First, however, there is a page  of pencilled  notes of  much interest
 but with various puzzling features. I give here this text exactly as it
 stands, and postpone discussion of it till the end.                    
                                                                       
    Did first lord of the  Elves make  Tree-folk in  order to  or through
  trying to understand trees?                                           
    Gimli  and  Legolas  to  go  with  Trotter  and  Boromir. It  must be
  Merry and Pippin who find Gandalf.                                    
    Notes for Treebeard.                                                
    In  some  ways  rather  stupid.  Are  the  Tree-folk ('Lone-walkers')
  hnau  that  have  gone  tree-like,  or  trees  that have  become hnau?(1)
  Treebeard might be 'moveless'  - but  here are  some notes  [?or) first
  [? suggestions].                                                      
    There  are  very  few  left.  Not  enough  room.  'Time  was  when  a
  fellow could  walk and  sing all  day and  hear no  more than  the echo
  of his voice in the mountains.'                                       
    Difference  between  trolls  -  stone  inhabited   by  goblin-spirit,
  stone-giants, and the 'tree-folk'. [Added in ink: Ents.]              
    Treebeard  is  anxious  for  news.  He  never  hears  much.   But  he
  smells things in the air.  Prefers breath  from South  and West  of the
  Sea.   Too  much   East  wind   these  days.   He  is   bothered  about
  Saruman:  a  machine-minded  man.  Fondest   of  Gandalf.   Very  upset
  at news of his fall. Only one of the wizards who understood trees.

   Tells how the Horsemasters have ridden away south leaving land         
 empty.                                                                   
   There are only three of us left: myself and Skinbark and Leaflock      
 [written above in ink: Fangorn Fladrib > Fladrif Finglas]. Saruman      
 has got hold of Skinbark. He went off to Isengard some time ago.         
 Leaflock has gone 'tree-ish'. He seldom comes into the hills: has        
 taken to standing half-asleep all through the summer with the deep       
 grass of the meadows round his knees. Covered with leaves he is.         
 Wakes up a bit in winter. May be somewhere about.                        
   Treebeard offers to take them across Rohan to or towards Minas,        
 Tirith. Treebeard smells war.                                            
   They see a battle of Wolfriders (Saruman) and the Horsemasters         
 - wild flowing hair and little bows.                                     
   How do they meet Gandalf? It should really be Sam or Frodo who         
 saw vision in the Mirror of Galadriel.                                   
   A possible return of Gandalf would be as an old bent beggar with       
 a battered hat coming to gates of Minas Tirith. He is let in. After, at
 siege's darkest hour when outer walls have fallen, he throws off         
 cloak and stands up - white. He leads sortie. Or he comes with           
 horses of Rohan riding on [struck out: Arfaxed] Shadowfax.               
   Another possibility. Cut out rescue of Frodo by Sam. Let Sam get       
 lost and meet Gandalf, and have adventures getting into Minas            
 Tirith. (But it was Frodo saw vision of Gandalf. Also Sam saw            
 vision of Frodo lying under dark cliff, pale, and of himself on a        
 winding stair.)                                                          
   The winding stair must be cut in rocks and go up from Gorgoroth        
 to watch-tower. Cut out Minas Morgul.                                    
                                                                         
 More roughly scribbled notes were added:                                 
                                                                         
   Trotter  sends  Legolas  and  Gimli  with  Boromir  to  Minas  Tirith.
 He  himself  wanders  looking  for  the  hobbits.  He meets  Gandalf. He
 is tempted but forsakes his ambition.                                    
   What  are  Treebeard  and  Ents  to  do  about  Saruman. Seek  help of
 Rohiroth?                                                                
                                                                         
 It  is  evident  that  this page  does not  belong to  the time  we have
 reached in the narrative texts, but  to some  earlier stage,  before the
 death  of  Boromir  had entered  the story.  To suppose  otherwise would
 depend,  of  course,  on  the  assumption  that  the  words  'Gimli  and
 Legolas to go  with Trotter  and Boromir.  It must  be Merry  and Pippin
 who  find  Gandalf'  already  stood on  this page  which my  father used
 afterwards for notes on the Ents; but  there is  nothing in  the appear-
 ance of the page to suggest it. 'It must be Merry and Pippin  who find
 Gandalf' suggests the rejection of some earlier idea,  and 'How  do they
 meet Gandalf?' later in these notes obviously relates to  this. Moreover
 the notes at the end, in which Boromir is still thought  of as  going to

 Minas  Tirith,  seem  certainly to  have been  set down  after the  main text
 had been written.                                                            
     In  the  outline  which  I have  called 'The  Story Foreseen  from Moria'
 it  was  Merry  and  Pippin  who  were  to  encounter  Treebeard   but  Gimli
 and  Legolas  who  were  to  meet  Gandalf  returned  (pp.  210  -  11);  and
 this was  repeated   in  the   outline  'The   Story  Foreseen   from  Lorien'
 (pp. 329 - 30).  The reference  to the  cutting-out of  Minas Morgul  and the
 substitution of a watchtower (see on  this question  p. 344  and note  39) is
 a  reference  to  the  story of  Sam and  Frodo in  'The Story  Foreseen from
 Lorien'. The  death of  Boromir entered  in an  outline for  the end  of 'The
 Breaking  of  the  Fellowship',  and  'The  Departure  of Boromir'  (pp. 375,
 378). On the face of it,  then, these  notes belong  to the  time of  work on
 'The  Great  River'  and  'The  Breaking  of  the  Fellowship',  and  show my
 father  pondering  the  way  ahead  after  the   Company  should   have  been
 brought to its dismemberment above the falls of Rauros.                      
     The  note  'It  should  really  be  Sam or  Frodo who  saw vision  in the
 Mirror  of  Galadriel'  - at  first sight  incomprehensible, since  there has
 never  been  a  suggestion  that  it  was  anybody  else  who  looked  in the
 Mirror  -  is  I  think  to  be  explained in  this way:  it would  have been
 dearer  if  my  father had  written 'It  really should  be Sam  or Frodo...',
 i.e.  the story  of the  Mirror has  been written  of Sam  and Frodo,  and so
 it  should be;  it should  not be  changed. What  is the  purport of  this? I
 think  that  my  father  was  changing  direction  as  he  wrote   -  already
 doubting  the  rightness  of  the  decision  to  make  it  Merry  and  Pippin
 who  met  Gandalf  returned;  and  this  seems  to   have  been   largely  on
 account  of  the  visions  in  the  Mirror.  Hence  his  suggestion (implying
 the  rejection  of  the  whole  story  of   Sam  and   Frodo  in   Mordor  as
 projected  in  'The  Story  Foreseen  from  Lorien') that  Sam should  be the
 one   who  met   Gandalf.  Nonetheless   he  was   unwilling  to   alter  the
 visions  seen  by  Frodo  and  Sam  in  the Mirror,  to make  it Sam  who saw
 Gandalf  walking  down  the  long  grey   road  (for   that  was   not  'what
 really  happened').  In  the   event,  of   course,  Gandalf   reappeared  to
 members  of  the  Company   who  had   never  looked   into  the   Mirror  of
 Galadriel.  Possibly  to  be  connected with  this is  the vision  of Gandalf
 vouchsafed to Trotter on Amon Hen (pp. 379 - 80).                            
     The  word  Ents  added  in  ink  to  the note  on the  difference between
 'trolls'  and  'tree-folk'  (with  its  striking  definition of  'trolls') was
  perhaps the first use of it in the new and very particular sense; for its
  former  use  in  Entish Lands,  Entish Dales  see p.  16 note  14 and  p. 65
  note 32, and cf. also Letters no. 157, 27 November 1954:                   
                                                                             
   As  usually  with  me  they  [the  Ents]  grew  rather  out of  their name,
   than  the  other  way  about.  I  always  felt that  something ought  to be
   done  about  the   peculiar  Anglo-Saxon   word  ent   for  a   'giant'  or
   mighty person of long ago - to whom all old works were ascribed.           
                                                                             
   The textual situation in this chapter is essentially  very similar  to that

  in the last, in that there is initial drafting for part of the chapter, but in
  the rest of it the draft text  was erased  and the  'fair copy'  written over
  it; and here again, and even more so,  the first  draft is  for the  most part
  extraordinarily close  to the  final form.  My father's  words in  the letter
  cited  on  p.  411,  'just  as  it  now  is', must  be modified,  however, in
  respect  of  certain  passages  where  the  narrative  leaves  the  immediate
  experience of Merry and Pippin and touches on wider themes.                  
    The  separation   of  'Treebeard'   as  'Chapter   XXV'  from   XXIV  ('The
  Uruk-hai') was carried out in the course of the writing of the fair copy.
    Taking  first  the  part  of  the  chapter for  which the  original setting
  down  of  the  story  is  available,  this  runs  from  the beginning  of the
  chapter  in  TT to  'they were  twisted round,  gently but  irresistibly' (p.
  66),  and  then  from '  "There is  quite a  lot going  on," said  Merry' (p.
  69)  to  Treebeard's  denunciation  of  Saruman (p.  77). The  draft, written
  so fast as to touch on total illegibility if the later text did not generally
  provide  sufficient  clues, remained  in all  essentials of  description into
  TT,  and   for  long   stretches  the   vocabulary  and   phrasing  underwent
  only  the  most  minor  forms  of change.  As in  the last  chapter I  give a
  single brief passage to exemplify this (TT p. 73):                           
                                                                              
    No  trees  grew  there.  Treebeard  strode  up with  scarcely any          
  slackening of his pace.  Then they  saw a  wide opening.  On either          
  side two trees grew like living gate-posts, but  there was  no gate          
  save  their  crossing  and  interwoven  branches;  and  as  the Ent          
  approached the trees raised up  their boughs  and all  their leaves          
  rustled and  whispered. For  they were  evergreen trees,  and their          
  leaves were dark and polished like the leaves of the holm-oak.               
    Beyond the  trees there  was a  wide level  space, as  though the          
  floor of a great hall had been hewn out of the side of the hill. On          
  either side the walls sloped upward until they  were fifty  feet in          
  height or more  and at  their feet  grew trees:  two long  lines of          
  trees increasing in size. At the far end the  rock wall  was sheer,          
  but in  it was  cut a  shallow bay  with an  arched roof:  the only          
  roof  save the  branches of  the trees  which overshadowed  all the          
  ground save for a broad aisle/path in the  middle. A  little stream          
  that  escaped  from  the  Entwash  spring high  above and  left the          
  main water  fell tinkling  down the  sheer face  of the  rear wall,          
  pouring like a clear curtain of silver drops in front of the arched          
  bay. It  was gathered  again in  [a] green  rock basin,  and thence          
  flowed  out  down  the  open  aisle/path  and  on  to   rejoin  the          
  Entwash in its journey through the Forest.                                   
                                                                              
  All  the  tiny  meticulous  changes  of  word  and rhythm  that differentiate
  this from the text of  TT were  introduced in  the writing  of the  fair copy
  manuscript.                                                                  

                                                                   
                                                                        
   There  are  some  small particular  points worthy  of mention  in this
 first part of the chapter. In the fair copy corresponding to TT pp. 66 - 7
 (the passage  is lacking  in independent  draft) Treebeard's  height was
 changed from ten feet to twelve, and then  to fourteen;  he says  that if
 he had not seen the hobbits  before he  heard them  'I should  have just
 batted  you  with  my  club'; and  his ejaculation  'Root and  twig! '
 replaced 'Crack my timbers!'(2)                                         
   When  Merry (Pippin  in the  draft) suggested  that Treebeard  must be
 getting tired of holding them up (TT p.  69), he  replied, both  in draft
 and fair copy:  'Hm, tired?  Tired? What  is that.  Ah yes,  I remember.
 No, I am not tired ., and later he says when they come to  the Ent-house
 that perhaps they are 'what you call "tired" '.                         
   The  first  major  development  from  the  original  text  comes  with
 Treebeard's  long  brooding  discourse  on  Lorien  and  Fangorn,  as he
 carried Merry and Pippin through the woods (TT pp. 70 - 2). At  first he
 said:                                                                   
                                                                        
 '...Neither this country nor anything else outside the Golden          
 Wood  is  what it  was when  Keleborn was  young. Tauretavarea          
 tansbalemorna  Tumbaletaurea landatavare.(3) That is  what they          
 used to say. But we have changed many things.' (He  means they          
 have weeded out rotten-hearted trees  such as  are in  the Old          
 Forest.)                                                                
                                                                        
 This was changed immediately to:                                        
                                                                        
 '... Things have changed, but it is still true in places.'              
   'What do you mean? What is true?' said Pippin.                        
   'I  am  not  sure  I  know,  and  I  am  sure I  could not  explain to
 you.  But  there  are  no  longer  any  evil trees  here (none  that are
 evil according to their kind and light)....'                            
                                                                        
   Treebeard's  remarks  about  trees  awakening,  'getting  Entish', and
 then showing in some cases  that they  have 'bad  hearts', are  very much
 as in TT; but to Pippin's question 'Like  the Old  Forest, do  you mean?'
 he replies:                                                             
                                                                        
   'Aye,  aye,  something  like,  but  not  as  bad  as  that.  That  was
 already  a  very  bad  region  even  in  the  days  when  there  was all
 one  wood  from  here  to  Lune,  and  we  were  called  the  East  End.
 But   something   was   queer   (went  wrong)   away  there:   some  old
 sorcery  in  the  Dark  Days,  I expect.  Ah, no:  the first  woods were
 more  like  Lorien,   only  thicker,   stronger,  younger.   Those  were
 days!  Time  was  when  one  could  walk  and  sing  all  day  and  hear
 no more than the echo of his own voice in the mountains. And          
 the scent. I used to spend weeks [? months] just breathing.'            

                    
                                                                        
  In the fair copy this was greatly expanded, but by no means to  the text
  of TT. Here Treebeard begins as  in the  original draft  (with Mountains
  of Lune for  Lune) as  far as  'this was  just the  East End',  but then
  continues:                                                             
                                                                        
  '...  Things  went  wrong  there  in  the  Dark  [>  Elder]  Days;  some
  old  sorcery,  I  expect  [)  some  old  shadow  of  the Great  Dark lay
  there].  They  say  that  even  the  Men  that  came  out  of   the  Sea
  were  caught  in  it,  and  some  of  them  fell  into  the  Shadow. But
  that  is  only  a  rumour  to   me.  Anyway   they  have   no  treeherds
  there,  no one  to care  for them:  it is  a long,  long time  since the
  Ents walked away from the banks of the Baranduin.'                     
     'What  about  Tom   Bombadil,  though?'   asked  Pippin.   'He  lives
  on the Downs close by. He seems to understand trees.'                  
     'What    about    whom?'    said   Treebeard.    'Tombombadil?   Tom-
  bombadil?  So  that  is  what  you  call  him.  Oh,  he  has got  a very
  long  name.  He  understands  trees,  right  enough;  but  he is  not an
  Ent.  He  is  no  herdsman.  He  laughs  and  does  not   interfere.  He
  never   made   anything  go   wrong,  but   he  never   cured  anything,
  either.  Why,  why,  it  is all  the difference  between walking  in the
  fields  and  trying  to  keep  a  garden;  between, between  passing the
  time  of  a  day  to  a  sheep on  the hillside,  or even  maybe sitting
  down  and  studying   sheep  till   you  know   what  they   feel  about
  grass,   and   being   a   shepherd.  Sheep   get  like   shepherd,  and
  shepherd like sheep,  it is  said, very  slowly. But  it is  quicker and
  closer  with  Ents  and  trees.  Like  some  Men  and  their  horses and
  dogs,  only  quicker  and  closer  even  than  that.  For Ents  are more
  like  Elves:  less  interested  in  themselves than  Men are,  better at
  getting  inside;   and  Ents   are  more   like  Men,   more  changeable
  than  Elves  are,  quicker  at  catching  the  outside;  only   they  do
  both  things  better than  either: they  are steadier,  and keep  at it.
  [Added:  Elves  began  it  of  course:  waking  trees  up  and  teaching
  them  to  talk.  They  always  wished  to talk  to everything.  But then
  the  Darkness  came,  and  they  passed  away  over  the  Sea,  or  fled
  into  far  valleys   and  hid   themselves.  The   Ents  have   gone  on
  tree-herding.] Some of my trees can walk, many can talk to me.         
     'But  it  was  not  so,  of course,  in the  beginning. We  were like
  your   Tombombadil   when   we   were  young.   The  first   woods  were
  more like the woods of Lorien....'                                     
                                                                        
     Most  of  this  passage,  including  all  reference to  Bombadil, was
  bracketed  for  omission,(4) and  my father  then struck  it all  out and
  substituted a new version on a separate page. It is clear that  all this
  revision  belongs  to  the  time  of  the  writing  of  the   fair  copy

 manuscript.(5) In this new version the text of TT is  all but  reached; but
 Treebeard says this of the Old Forest:                                  
                                                                        
 '..I  do   not  doubt   that  there   is  some   shadow  of   the  Great
 Darkness  lying   there  still   away  North;   and  bad   memories  are
 handed  down;  for  that  Forest  is  old,  though  none  of  the  trees
 are  really  old  there,  not  what  I  call old.  But there  are hollow
 dales  in  this  land  where  [the  shadow  >]  the  Darkness  has never
 been lifted....'                                                        
                                                                        
   Treebeard's  song  (In the  willow-meads of  Tasarinan) was  set down
 in the draft  manuscript in  a faint  scribble that  nonetheless reached
 without hesitation almost the final form.(6)                            
   When  in  the  draft  Treebeard reaches  the Ent-house  (TT p.  73) he
 makes  no remark  about the  distance they  have come,  and in  the fair
 copy  he  says:  'I  have  brought  you  three  times twelve  leagues or
 thereabouts, if measurements of that kind  hold good  in the  country of
 Fangorn', where 'three'  was changed  to 'seven'  before the  words were
 rejected and replaced by his computation in 'Ent-strides'. In  the draft
 he says that the place is named Fonthill, changed to Funtial,  then back
 to Fonthill,(7) and finally 'Part of the name of this place could be called
 Wellandhouse in your language' (Wellinghall in the fair copy).          
   Treebeard  stooped and  lifted the  two great  vessels onto  the table
 (this my father wrote in the fair copy also before  at once  striking it
 out); and he said before  he lowered  himself onto  the bed  ('with only
 the slightest bend at the waist') 'I think better flat'.                
   The  next  major development  in the  evolution of  the text  comes at
 this point, when Merry and Pippin tell Treebeard  their story.  Here the
 draft reads:                                                            
                                                                        
 They  followed   no  order   for  Treebeard   would  often   stop  them,
 and  go  back  again  or  jump  forward.  He  was  only   interested  in
 parts of the tale: in  their account  of the  Old Forest,  in Rivendell,
 in  Lothlorien,  and  especially  in  anything   to  do   with  Gandalf,
 most  of  all  in  Saruman.  The  hobbits  were  sorry  that  they could
 not   remember   more   clearly  Gandalf's   account  of   that  wizard.
 Treebeard kept reverting to him.                                        
   'Saruman   has  been   here  some   time,  a   long  time   you  would
 call  it.  Too  long  I  should  now  say.  Very quiet  he was  to begin
 with: no trouble to  any of  us. I  used to  talk to  him. Very  eager to
 listen  he  was  in  those  days, ready  to learn  about old  days. Many
 a  thing  I  have  told  him  that   he  would   never  have   known  or
 guessed  otherwise.  Never.  He  never  repaid  me   -  never   told  me
 anything.  And  he  got  more  like  that:  his  face more  like windows
 in a stone wall, windows with blinds (shutters inside).                  

   'But  now  I  understand.  So  he's  thinking   of  becoming   a  Power,
 is  he.  I  have  not  troubled  myself  with  the  great wars,  Elves are
 not  my  business,  nor  Men;  and  it  is  with  them  that  wizards  are
 mostly concerned. They are always worrying about the future.              
 I don't like worrying about the future. But I shall have to begin,        
 I see. Mordor seemed a long way, but these orcs! And if                   
 Saruman  has  started  taking  them  up,  I  have  got  trouble  right  on
 my  borders.  Cutting  down   trees.  Machines,   great  fires.   I  won't
 stand  it.  Trees  that  were  my   friends.  Trees   I  had   known  from
 nut and acorn. Cut down and left sometimes. Orc-work.                     
   'I  have  been  thinking  I  should  have  to  do  something. But  I see
 it  will  be  better  sooner  than  later.  Men  are  better   than  orcs,
 especially  if  the  Dark  Lord  doesn't  get  at  them. But  the Rohiroth
 and  the  folk  of  Ondor  if  Saruman  attacks  at  the  back  will  soon
 be  in  a  [?lonely]....  We  shall  have  [?hordes]  from  the  East  and
 ... [? swarm] of orcs all over us.  I shall  be [? eaten]  up -  and there
 will  be  nowhere  to  go.  The  flood  will  rise into  the pines  in the
 mountains.  I  don't  think  the  Elves  would  find  room  for  me  in a,
 ship.  I  could  not  go  over  sea.  I  should  wither  away from  my own
 soil.                                                                     
   'If  you'll  come  with  me  we'll  go  to  Isengard! You'll  be helping
 your own friends.'                                                        
                                                                          
 With the further words  '[?Of] the  Ents and  Entwives' the  initial draft
 peters  out  here;  but  in  these last  hastily jotted  lines we  see the
 emergence  of  a  major  new  idea  and  new  direction.  The   role  that
 Treebeard was to play in the  raising of  the siege  of Minas  Tirith (pp.
 211, 330, and cf. p. 412) is gone, and all is suddenly  clear: Treebeard's
 part is to attack Saruman, who dwells on his very borders.                
   There is very little further initial drafting  for this  chapter extant;
 almost all is lost erased beneath the fair copy  text. Rough  workings for
 the Song of the Ent and the Entwife are found (see p.  421); and  there is
 also a little scrap which shows my father's first  thoughts for  the march
 on Isengard:                                                              
                                                                          
   Ents excited. To Isengard!                                              
   Hobbits see trees behind. Is Forest moving?                             
   Orc woodcutters come on the Ents. Horrible surprise to find wood        
   alive. They are destroyed. Ents take shields. They go on to Isengard
   End of Ch. XXV.                                                         
                                                                          
   But  it  seems  to me  most unlikely  that those  parts of  the original
 drafting that are lost were any less close to the fair copy than are those
 that survive.(8) The text of the fair copy manuscript in  the latter  part of
 the  chapter  was  retained  in  TT  (pp.  75 -  90) without  the smallest

 deviation  of  expression  almost  throughout  its   length:  Treebeard's
 thoughts of Saruman and  his becoming  'hot', his  story of  the Entwives,
 the Entmoot, the  time spent  with Bregalad,  the march  of the  Ents and
 Pippin's awareness  of the  moving groves  of trees  behind them,  to the
 last words: ' "Night lies over Isengard," said Treebeard.               
   Exceptions  to  this  are  very  few.(9) Against  the  passage  in  which
 Treebeard  condemns  Saruman this  note (it  is scarcely  in Treebeard's
 style) is written in the margin (and subsequently struck through):  'It is
 not  perhaps  mere chance  that Orthanc  which in  Elvish means  "a spike
 of rock"  is in  the tongue  of Rohan  "a machine".'  With this  cf. 'The
 Road  to  Isengard  (11  p.  160):  This  was  Orthanc,  the  citadel  of
 Saruman,  the  name  of  which  had  (by  design  or  chance)  a  twofold
 meaning; for in the Elvish speech  orthanc signifies  Mount Fang,  but in
 the language of the Mark of old the Cunning Mind.'                      
   The  alteration  to the  text made  in 1944,  extending the  Entmoot by
 an extra day, has appeared  already: see  p. 407.  Until this  change was
 made  the  Entmoot  ended  on  the afternoon  of the  second day  (cf. TT
 pp. 87 - 8):                                                            
                                                                        
 Most of  the time  they sat  silent under  the shelter  of the  bank; for
 the  wind  was  colder,  and  the  clouds  closer  and greyer;  there was
 little  sunshine.  There  was  a  feeling  of  expectancy  in   the  air.
 They  could  see  that   Bregalad  was   listening,  although   to  them,
 down  in  the  dell  of  his  Ent-house,  the  sound  of  the  Ent-voices
 was faint.                                                              
   The   afternoon   came,   and   the   sun,   going  west   towards  the
 mountains, sent out long yellow beams...                                
                                                                        
   At the same time as this was rewritten, my  father replaced  the Entish
 words (first appearing in the fair copy manuscript) of  the song  sung by
 the  Ents  as  they  marched  from  the Moot  past Bregalad's  house, but
 not to the text in TT p. 88.(10)                                        

                          NOTES.                                      
                                                                     
1.  The  word hnau  is taken  from C.  S. Lewis,  Out of  the Silent     
 Planet:  on  Earth  there  is  only one  kind of  hnau, Men,  but on
 Malacandra there are three totally distinct races that are hnau.     
2.  A pencilled  note on  the fair  copy says  that 'Crack  my timbers'
 had  been  'queried  by  Charles  Williams'.   The  same   change  was
 made at a later point in the chapter (TT p. 75).                     
3.  This  was  changed  to   the  form   in  TT   already  on   the  draft
 manuscript,  but  with  lomeamor  for  lomeanor,  and   this  remained
 uncorrected on the fair copy.                                        
4.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  why Treebeard's  knowledge of
 and   estimate   of   Tom  Bombadil   was  removed.   Conceivably,  my

      father  felt  that  the  contrast  between  Bombadil  and   the  Ents
      developed  here  confused  the  conflict  between  the  Ents  and the
      Entwives; or, it may be, it was precisely this passage that gave rise
      to the idea of that conflict.                                        
  5.  This is seen from the fact that  the new  version was  still numbered
      in 'Chapter XXIV', i.e. 'Treebeard'  had not  yet been  separated off
      as  a  new  chapter,  as was  done in  the course  of the  writing of
      the  fair  copy  (p.  414).  Moreover,  when  later the  hobbits told
      Treebeard  their  story  he  was  'enormously  interested  in  every-
      thing', and 'everything' included Tom Bombadil.                      
  6.  The  names  in the  draft have  these differences  from those  in TT:
      Dorthonion   is   Orod   Thuin   (preceded   by  Orod   Thon),  which
      remained  in  the  fair  copy   and  following   typescript,  changed
      later  to  Orod-na-Thon  (see  the   Etymologies,  V.392);   and  for
      Aldalome  appears  another  name  that  I  cannot   certainly  read:
      His .. eluinalda.                                                    
  7.  The  name  Fonthill  is  specifically derived  from Fonthill  in Wilt-
      shire, as is seen from Funtial, which is the  form of  the place-name
      found in a tenth-century charter. The  first element  of the  name is
      probably  Old  English  funta  'spring',  and  the second  the Celtic
      word ial 'fertile  upland region';  but my  father no  doubt intended
      it to be taken as if from Old English hyll 'hill'.                   
  8.  This is supported by the bits of text where the  erased draft  can to
      some  extent  be  made  out,  and  by  a  piece of  independent draft
      revision  of  a   part  of   the  'Saruman'   passage.  -   The  name
      Dernslade (slade 'valley,  dell, dingle')  can be  seen in  the draft
      where the fair copy has Derndingle.                                  
  9.  In addition to  those mentioned  in the  text, it  may be  noted that
      Treebeard's  answer  to  Pippin's  question  about  the  small number
      of the Ents: 'Have a great many died?'  is here  briefer: '  "Oh no!"
      said Treebeard. "But  there were  only a  few to  begin with,  and we
      have not much increased. There have been no Entings...'              
         Among  names,  Angrenost  (Isengard}  now  appears;  a  blank  was
      left  for  the  Elvish  name of  the Valley  of Saruman,  Nan Gurunir
      being added in; and Gondor remains Ondor (see p. 401).               
 10.  The original form of the Entish words was thus:                      
           Ta-ruta  dum-da  dum-da  dum  /   ta-rara  dum-da   dum-da  bum/
      Da-duda rum-ta rum-ta rum I ta-dada rum-ta rum-ta dum/               
         The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song.     
           Ta-bumda    romba    bumda-romba   banda-romba    bum-ta   bum /
      Da-dura dara lamba bum I ta-lamba dara rum-ta rum!                   
           Ta-bum-da-dom   I  ta-rum-ta-rom   I  ta-bum-ta   lamba  dum-da-
      dom  //
      ta-bum / ta-rum I ta-bum-ta lamba dum//                              
      This was changed in 1944 to:                                         
           A! rundamara-nundarun tahora-mundakumbalun,                     

      taruna-runa-runarun tahora-kumbakumbanun.                                
  The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song:                
      Tarundaromba-rundaromba mandaromba-mundamun,                             
      tahurahara-lambanun talambatara-mundarun,                                
            tamunda-rom, tarunda-rom, tamunda-lamba-munda-                     
                tom.                                                           
                                                                              
                       The Song of the Ent and the Entwife.                    
                                                                              
     Rough workings and a first completed draft are extant; in this, verses
 1 and 3 are as in the final form.                                             
                                                                              
2. When Spring is in the sprouting corn and flames of green arise,             
 When blossom like a living snow upon the orchard lies,              
 When earth is warm, and wet with rain, and its smell is in the air,           
 I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair.                 
                                                                              
4. When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown,        
 When straw is long and ear is white and harvest comes to town,         
 When honey spills and apple swells and days are wealthiest,                   
 I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is best.                 
                                                                              
5. When winter comes and boughs are bare and all the grass is grey,          
 When and starless night o'ertakes the sunless day,                            
 When storm is wild and trees are felled, then in the bitter rain              
 I'll look for thee, and call to thee, I'll come to thee again.                
                                                                              
 The blank space in this verse is  left thus  in the  original. Verse  6 differs
 from  the  final  form  only  in  the  first  line,  with repeated  When Winter
 comes,  when  Winter  comes;  and  the  concluding  lines  differ  only  in the
 roads  that  lead  for  the  road  that  leads.  A  preliminary version  of the
 ending is found, written as prose, thus:                                      
                                                                              
 I'll come back  to thee  and look  for thee  again, I'll  come to  thee and
 comfort  thee, and  find thee  in the  rain. We'll  walk the  land together
 and  gather  seed  and  set,  and  journey  to  an  island  where  both can
 live again.                                                                   

                                 XXIII.                              
                          NOTES ON VARIOUS TOPICS.                       
                                                                        
 There are three  isolated pages  of notes,  heterogeneous in  content and
 obviously even on the same page written at different  times, but  each of
 which has links to  the others.  Some of  the notes  may well  be earlier
 than the time we have reached,(1) others later, but rather than  split them
 up and try to fit them  in uncertainly  elsewhere it  seems best  to give
 them together.                                                          
  The page that  I give  first begins  with the  note 'Wizards  = Angels',
 and this same note is found on the other two pages also. I take it  to be
 the first appearance in written record of this conception, i.e.  that the
 Istari  or  Wizards  were  angeloi,  'messengers',  emissaries  from  the
 Lords of the West: see Unfinished Tales  pp. 388  ff., and  especially my
 father's  long  discussion  in Letters  no. 156  (4 November  1954). Then
 follows:                                                                
                                                                        
    Gandalf  to  reappear  again.  How  did  he  escape? This  might never
  be  fully  explained.  He  passed through  fire -  and became  the White
  Wizard.  'I  forgot  much that  I knew,  and learned  again much  that I
  had  forgotten.'  He  has  thus  acquired  something  of  the   awe  and
  terrible  power  of  the  Ring-wraiths,  only on  the good  side. Evil
  things fly from him if  he is  revealed -  when he  shines. But  he does
  not as a rule reveal himself.                                          
    He  should  have  a  trial  of  strength   with  Saruman.   Could  the
  Balrog of the Bridge be in fact Saruman?                               
    Or better? as in older sketch Saruman is very affable.               
                                                                        
 With this compare the initial sketch for 'The Riders of Rohan', p. 389
 The extraordinary idea that the Balrog of Moria might be Saruman        
 has appeared in a note written on the back of a page of the fair copy
 manuscript of 'Lothlorien', p. 236: 'Could not Balrog be Saruman?      
 Make battle on Bridge be between Gandalf and Saruman?' The              
 reference to the 'older sketch' - 'Saruman is very affable' - is to 'The
 Story Foreseen from Moria', p. 212, where on the homeward journey      
 'They call at Isengard. Gandalf knocks. Saruman comes out very          
 affable', etc.                                                          
  The next note on this page records my father's decision to move the
 whole chronology of the Quest forward by a month:                       
                                                                        
                Time Scheme. Too much takes place in winter. They should

 remain  longer  at  Rivendell.  This  would  have  additional  advantage
 of  allowing  Elrond's  scouts  and  messengers  far  longer   time.  He
 should  discover  Black  Riders  have  gone   back.  Frodo   should  not
 start until say Dec. 24th.                                              
                                                                        
 It  seems  likely  that 24  December was  chosen as  being 'numerically'
 one  month  later  than  the existing  date, 24  November (p.  169); and
 that  it  was  changed  to  25  December  to  make  the new  dates agree
 'numerically'  with  the  existing  time-structure  (since  November has
 30  days  but  December  31):  see  p.  368.  I  do  not  understand the
 statement  here  that  'he  [Elrond] should  discover Black  Riders have
 gone  back', since  the final  text of  'The Ring  Goes South'  had been
 reached in Gandalf's words 'It is rash to be too sure, yet I  think that
 we  may  hope  now  that  the  Ringwraiths  were  scattered,   and  have
 been obliged to return as  best they  could to  their Master  in Mordor,
 empty and shapeless.'                                                   
   Another note on this page,  not written  at the  same time,  refers to
 'Chapter   XXIV:   Open   with   conversation   of  Goblins   and  their
 quarrel.  How  are  Merry  and  Pippin  armed?'  And  the   last  reads:
 'Sarn-gebir  =  Grailaw  or  Graidon  Hills'.  Both  these   names  mean
 'Grey  Hill(s)':  Old   English  hlaw   'hill',  Northern   English  and
 Scottish law, and Old English dun, Modern English down.                 
   The  second  page  contains exact  repetitions of  notes found  on the
 other pages or  in outlines  already given,  and need  not be  cited. On
 the third page the following  (only) was  written in  ink, and  seems to
 be the primary element on the page:                                     
                                                                        
 Feb. 9 1942 Geography.                                                  
 Ondor > Gondor.                                                         
 Osgiliath > Elostirion. Ostirion = fort. Lorn = haven. Londe =          
 gulf.                                                                   
                                                                        
 On the  date see  p. 379,  where I  have noted  that on  the back  of an
 outline for 'The Departure of Boromir' is a clear indication that it was
 written in the winter of 1941 - 2. The precise date  given here  for the
 change of Ondor to Gondor is notable;  in the  fair copy  of 'Treebeard'
 the form was still Ondor (see p. 401).                                  
 Elostirion was written  above Osgiliath  in the  outline for  'The Riders
 of  Rohan'  given  on  p. 389.  This change  was of  course impermanent,
 but the name Elostirion became that of the tallest  of the  White Towers
 on Emyn Beraid, in which the palantir was set (Of the Rings of  Power,
 in  The  Silmarillion,  p.  292).(2) -  With lorn  haven cf.  Forlorn North
 Haven' and Harlorn 'South Haven' on  the First  Map (pp.  301 -  2), for
 later  Forlond,  Harlond;  but on  that map  appears also  Mithlond, the
 Grey  Havens  (where  however  it  is  possible  that  Mithlond actually
 meant 'Grey Gulf').                                                     
                                                                        
    The other notes on this page are heterogeneous and not necessarily

 of  the same  time. The  heading 'Geography'  was extended  to 'Geogra-
 phy and Language'.  Some of  these notes  are concerned  to find  a new
 name  for  Sarn  Gebir: rejected  names are  Sern Lamrach;  Tarn Felin;
 Trandoran,  before  (added  much  later  to  the  page)  Emyn  Muil  is
 reached (for Muil see the  Etymologies, V.374,  stem M U Y).  There are
 also the  English names  Graydon Hills  and Grailaws,  as on  the first
 page of these notes, and Hazowland.(3)                                 
   Another group of notes reads:                                        
                                                                       
   Language of Shire = modern English                                   
   Language of Dale = Norse (used by Dwarves of that region)            
   Language of Rohan = Old English                                      
   'Modern English' is lingua franca spoken by all people (except a few
   secluded folk like Lorien) - but little and ill by orcs.             
                                                                       
                                  NOTES.                                
                                                                       
 1. It  is  to  be  remembered  that statements  such as  'Gandalf to
    reappear again' do not by  any means  imply that  this is  where the
    idea first  arose: often  they are  to be  taken as  reassertions of
    existing but as yet unachieved ideas.                               
 2. An altogether isolated and undateable note on a slip of paper also
    evinces dissatisfaction with the name Osgiliath. The reverse  of the
    slip  carries  notes on  unconnected matters  which my  father dated
    '1940', which may or may not  be significant.  At the  present time,
    at any rate, I can cast no light on the purport of this note:       
      Lord of Rings                                                     
      Osgiliath won't do. Name should = New building 'Newbold'          
         Town built again echain Ostechain                              
    The word 'building' is very  unclear, but  is assured  by 'Newbold',
    a  common  English  village  name   meaning  'New   building',  from
    Old English bold (also bodl, botl)  closely associated  with byldan,
    Modern  English  build.  I  will add  here, incidentally  and irrel-
    evantly, that another derivative  from the  same source  is Nobottle
    (Northamptonshire),  which  my  father  allowed  me  to  add  to  my
    map of the Shire made  in 1943  (VI.107, item  V) and  which remains
    in that published in The Lord of the Rings, although at that  time I
    was under the impression that the  name meant  that the  village was
    so poor and remote that it did not even possess an inn.             
 3. Hazowland  is  clearly  from  the  Old  English  poetic   word  hasu
    (inflected hasw-) 'grey,  ashen'; cf.  Hasupada 'Greycoat',  name of
    Gandalf in  Rohan (p.  405 note  21), and  Hasofel (Hasufel)  of the
    same meaning, the horse lent to Aragorn by Eomer.                   

                                     XXIV.                                  
                               THE WHITE RIDER.                             
                                                                           
 For  the  greater  part of  this chapter  the evolution  can be  traced very
 dearly.  Initial  drafting  not  erased or  overwritten, more  developed but
 discontinuous drafting,  and a  'fair copy'  that itself  underwent constant
 correction  in  the  act  of  composition,  were  a continuous  process, and
 the history of  almost every  sentence can  be followed  until near  the end
 of  the  chapter.  This was  numbered 'XXVI'  from an  early stage;  a title
 was  added  to  the  'fair  copy'  later,  first  Sceadufax  in  Old English
 spelling,  then  'The  White  Rider'.  The process  of composition  here was
 continuous and all of the same time, so that 'first draft',  'second draft',
 'fair  copy',  'corrections  to  fair  copy' cannot  be treated  as distinct
 entities, each complete before the next stage.                             
  An  example  of  this overlapping  is seen  at once.  In the  original form
 of the opening, to  Gimli's insistence  that the  old man  who stood  by the
 fire  in  the  night  was  Saruman,  Aragorn replies:  'I wonder.  The horses
 showed no signs of fear.'  In the  'fair copy'  (more accurately,  the first
 coherent  manuscript)  this  became:  '  "I  wonder,"  said  Aragorn.  "What
 did he seem to  be? An  old man?  It is  strange enough  in itself:  that an
 old  man  should  be  walking  alone  by  the  eaves  of  Fangorn.  Yet  the
 horses  showed  no  signs  of  fear." '  This  obviously  belongs  with  the
 sentence  struck  out  at  the  end of  'The Riders  of Rohan':  'The horses
 remained  quiet,  and  seemed  to feel  nothing amiss',  and suggests  to my
 mind  that  my  father  believed  the  old  man  to be  Gandalf (see  p. 403
 and  note  26).  Yet  in  the most  'primitive' drafting  further on  in the
 chapter  the  old  man  in  the  night  certainly  was Saruman  (see further
 pp. 427 - 8).                                                              
  The  later  chronology  of  the  chase  across  Rohan  not  being  present,
 of  course  (see  p.  406),  Aragorn  remarks  that  the  footprints  by the
 riverside  are  a  day  old  .,  Gandalf  says that  the hobbits  climbed up
 here  yesterday',  and  that  he  himself  had  seen  Treebeard  'three days
 ago': in TT all these  are made  one day  earlier, on  account of  the extra
 day  added  in  1944.  At  one  point,  however,  the  need  for  correction
 escaped  my  father's  notice:  Legolas'  words  that  the  last  time  he saw
 the eagle  was  'three  days  ago,  above the  Emyn Muil'  (TT p.  98). This
 should  have  been  changed  to .four  days ago,  see the  table on  p. 406,
 and  cf.  The  Tale  of  Years  in  LR,  February  27  Aragorn  reaches  the
 west-cliff  at  sunrise',  and (February  having 30  days) 'March  1 Aragorn
 meets Gandalf the White'.                                                  

   The  story  of the  first meeting  with Gandalf  was sketched  out in
 every essential point in the earliest draft. When the  three companions
 saw  the  old  man  walking  through  the  wood  below   them,  Gimli's
 horror of Saruman  was at  first expressed  in more  murderous fashion:
 'Shoot, Legolas!  Draw your  bow! Shoot!  It is  Saruman, or  worse. Do
 not let him speak or bewitch us!' This was retained  in the  fair copy;
 and when subsequently it  was softened  to a  demand that  Legolas only
 prepare  to  shoot,  Gimli's  following words  were retained:  'Why are
 you waiting? What is the matter with  you?' In  the earliest  draft the
 wizard  wore  an  'old  hat';  this  became  a  'battered hat',  then a
 'wide-brimmed hat' (see p. 403).(1)                                   
   The opening of their long conversation proceeds thus in  the earliest
 draft (cf. TT pp. 98 - 9):                                            
                                                                      
 '... At the turn of the Tide. The great storm is coming, but the      
 Tide has turned even at this moment. I have passed through fire       
 and ruin and I have been badly burned, or well burned. But            
 come, tell me now of yourselves. I have seen much in deep             
 places and in high since we parted; I have forgotten much that I      
 knew, and learned again much that I had forgotten.(2) [Some              
 things I can see far off and some close at hand; but not all can I
 see. Changed at once to:] Many things I can see far off but many      
 that are close at hand I cannot see.'                                 
   'What do you wish to know?' said Aragorn. 'All that has             
 happened would be a long tale. Will you not first tell us tidings     
 of Merry and Pippin? Did you find them, and are they safe?'           
   'No, I did not find them,' said Gandalf.(3) 'I was busy with           
 perilous matters, and did not know of their captivity until the       
 eagle told me.'                                                       
   'The eagle! ' said Legolas. 'We have seen an eagle high and far .
 off: the last time was three days ago, above Sarn Gebir.'             
   'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'that was Gwaewar the Windlord who             
 rescued me from Orthanc. I sent him before me to gather               
 tidings, and to watch the River. His sight is keen, but he cannot     
 see all that passes in wood and valley. But there are some things     
 that I can see unaided. This I may tell you: the Ring has passed      
 beyond my help or the help of any of our original Company.            
 Very nearly it was revealed to the Enemy, but not quite. I had        
 some part in that. For I sat upon the mountains beneath the           
 snows of Methedras and I strove with the Dark Tower, and the          
 shadow passed. Then I was weary: very weary.'                         
                                                                      
 The story that Gandalf was on Tol Brandir when Frodo sat on Amon      
 Hen, and that he was borne across Rohan by the eagle (see p. 396), has

                                                                   
                                                                          
 been  abandoned;  Gwaewar   (Gwaihir)  is   now  in   his  later   role  as
 gatherer of tidings for Gandalf in the region  of Anduin.  It is  not clear
 at  this  stage  what  had  happened  to  Gandalf,  and  it seems  that my
 father did not for the moment intend to make it so. Is  it to  be supposed
 that  he  made  his  way  south  along  the  mountains   and  so   came  to
 Methedras,  where  he  sat  'beneath the  snows and  strove with  the Dark
 Tower'  while  Frodo  wore  the  Ring  on  Amon  Hen?  A  single  isolated
 and  interrupted   sentence  says   'Gwaewar  found   me  walking   in  the
 woods.   Of  him   I';  which   surely  means   that  Gandalf   came  from
 Methedras  into  Fangorn,  and  that  Gwaewar  having  found  him  he sent
 the eagle away  east 'to  watch the  River and  gather tidings'.  This may
 suggest that the story of his being borne by the  eagle to  Lothlorien had
 not yet arisen.                                                           
   When  drafting  the  chapter  my  father  had  at  first no  thought, it
 seems,  that  Gandalf  should  display  to Aragorn,  Legolas and  Gimli 'a
 piece  of his  mind' (TT  p. 100)  on the  hopes and  chances of  the War.
 After  Gandalf has  been told  that they  think that  Sam went  with Frodo
 to Mordor, he says: 'Did he,  indeed. It  is news  to me,  but not  at all
 surprising.  But now  about Merry  and Pippin,  for I  shall not  get your
 tale out of you before I have told you of them.'                          
   It was perhaps at this point  that my  father set  down a  short outline
 for what Gandalf might now say:                                           
                                                                          
   Eagle   sights   orcs  and   hobbits.  Saruman   about  in   the  woods.
   Orc-battle.  Treebeard.  They  are  safe,  but  something  is  going on.
   Revolt  of  trees?  But  we  are  called south.  War is  beginning. They
   must  wait  in hope  and patience  to find  Merry and  Pippin ...  - but
   their  friendship  and  devotion  in  following  them was  rewarded. The
   Company   had   done   nobly   and  Gandalf   was  pleased   with  them.
   They ask what had happened to him - he won't tell yet.                  
                                                                          
   It  seems  that  the  new  course of  the conversation  ('Now sit  by me
 and tell me the tale of your journey', TT p. 99)  was at  once introduced,
 leading to Gandalf's account of the intentions, desires, and fears  of the
 Dark  Lord  and  of  Saruman.  This  was  a characteristic  development in
 stages  by  expansion,  refinement  of  expression,  and  some re-ordering
 of its structure, but all the essentials of Gandalf's thought were present
 from  the  first  drafting.  There  are  however in  the earlier  stages a
 number of interesting differences to be recorded.                         
   That  Saruman  was  'about  in  the  woods' is  mentioned in  the little
 outline just given; in the first drafting Gandalf tells (as in TT, p. 101)
 that 'he could not  wait at  home and  came forth  to meet  his captives',
 but  that  he  was  too  late,  the  battle  was   over,  and   being  'no
 woodcraftsman'   he   had   misinterpreted   what   had   happened.  'Poor
 Saruman!' Gandalf adds, 'what  a fall  for one  so wise!  I fear  that [he
 started too late to  make a  success of  wickedness >]  he started  in the

  race  too  late.  He  seems  not to  have the  luck he  needs in  his new
  profession. He at least will never sit in the Dark Tower.'               
    The  passage  about  the  Winged  Messenger,   absent  in   the  draft,
  appears in the  fair copy,  where Legolas  says that  he felled  him from
  the sky 'above Sarn Ruin' (see p. 361 and note 20),  and that  'He filled
  us all with fear, but none so much as Frodo.'                            
    In  the  first  draft Gimli  asks: 'That  old man.  You say  Saruman is
  abroad.  Was  it  you or  Saruman that  we saw  last night?'  and Gandalf
  replies: 'If you saw an old man last night, you certainly did not see me.
  But  as  we  seem  to  look  so  much alike  that you  wished to  make an
  incurable  dent  in  my  hat, I  must guess  that you  saw Saruman  [or a
  vision >]  or some  wraith of  his making.  [Struck out:  I did  not know
  that  he  lingered  here  so  long.]' Against  Gandalf's words  my father
  wrote in the margin:  Vision of  Gandalf's thought.  There is  clearly an
  important  clue  here to  the curious  ambiguity surrounding  the appari-
  tion of the night  before, if  one knew  how to  interpret it;  but these
  words are not perfectly clear.  They obviously  represent a  new thought:
  arising  perhaps from  Gandalf's suggestion  that if  it was  not Saruman
  himself that they saw it was a 'vision' or 'wraith' that he had made, the
  apparition  is  now  to  emanate from  Gandalf himself.  But of  whom was
  it  a  vision?  Was  it  an embodied  'emanation' of  Gandalf, proceeding
  from  Gandalf  himself,  that  they saw?  'I look  into his  unhappy mind
  and I see his doubt and  fear', Gandalf  has said;  it seems  more likely
  perhaps  that  through  his   deep  concentration   on  Saruman   he  had
  'projected'  an  image  of  Saruman  which  the  three  companions  could
  momentarily see. I have found  no other  evidence to  cast light  on this
  most  curious  element  in  the  tale;  but  it  may be  noted that  in a
  time-scheme  deriving  from  the  time  of the  writing of  'Helm's Deep'
  and  'The  Road  to  Isengard' my  father noted  of that  night: 'Aragorn
  and his companions spend  night on  the battle-field,  and see  "old man"
  (Saruman).'                                                              
    The  earliest  of  several  versions  of  Gandalf's  reply  to Legolas'
  question 'Who is Treebeard?'  is notable,  though extremely  difficult to
  read:                                                                    
                                                                          
       'Ah,'  said  Gandalf,  'Now  you are  asking. He  is Fangorn,  that is
    Treebeard, Treebeard  the Ent:  what else  shall I  call him?  The eldest
    of  the old,  the King  of the  Treebeards, the  dwellers in  the Forest.
    Stone-old, tree-hale, snail-slow, strong as  a growing  root. I  wish you
    had  met  him.  Your  friends  were  more  fortunate.  For  they  came up
    here, as  Aragorn has  [? already] discovered.  But no  marks of  them go
    down,  as  he  may  have  discovered  and  soon  would.  But  here ...
    marks  by  [?one]  [of]  Treebeard's  feet.  This was  a place,  he often
    came  to  it when  he wished  to be  alone and  look outside  the Forest.
    He has taken the hobbits away.'                                        
       'Then they are safe, since you speak well of Treebeard?'            

    'Safe? Yes, as far as the Ents go. But there is  [?terrible] hurry.'
 Gandalf  tells  them  about  Ents.  Says  it  was  well that  Merry and
 Pippin I?came there]. They did right to  follow. Yet  to meet  the Ents
 is not their task. Too late  anyway. He  looks at  sun. 'We  have spent
 all the time allowed to a  meeting of  parted friends.  We must  go. We
 are needed South.'                                                     
                                                                       
 In  a  more  developed  draft  Aragorn's  response to  Gandalf's naming
 'the Ents' (TT p. 102) reads:                                           
                                                                       
 'The  Ents!' exclaimed  Aragorn. 'Then  there is  truth in  the ancient
 legends, [and the  names that  they use  in Rohan  have a  meaning! The
 Entwash and the Entmark (for that is how they call the Forest)]        
                                                                       
 Above  Entmark  is  written Entwood.  - These  remarks about  the names
 containing Ent were  bracketed for  rejection at  once, since  the text
 continues:  'about  the  dwellers  in  the deep  forest, and  the giant
 Shepherds  of  the  Trees',  as  in TT.  In one  of many  draftings for
 Legolas' words at this point he says: 'I thought that [Fangorn] was the
 name of the Forest. A strange name for a wood, now I consider it.'     
  The words 'he is the oldest living thing that still walks beneath the
 sun  upon  this  Middle-earth' appear  in the  draft, written  just so,
 without any hesitation  in reaching  them. Of  his seeing  Treebeard in
 the woods Gandalf says:                                                
                                                                       
 '... I passed him in the forest three days ago; and I do not doubt that
 he saw me, since the eyes of Treebeard miss little [written  in margin:
 and he saw me, indeed he called my name]; but  I did  not speak,  for I
 had  much  to  think  about, and  I did  not then  know that  Merry and
 Pippin had been carried off.'                                          
                                                                       
 The text of TT is reached in the fair copy. He says  in the  draft that
 'something is going to happen which  has not  happened since  the Elves
 awoke'; in the fair  copy this  becomes 'since  the Elves  first woke',
 changed to  'since the  Elves were  born' ('since  the Elder  Days', TT
 p.  103).  But when  Legolas says  'What is  going to  happen?' Gandalf
 replies: 'I do not know. Merry  and Pippin  do perhaps,  by now;  but I
 do not.'                                                               
 To his words to Aragorn, urging him not  to regret  his choice  'in the
 valley of Sarn Gebir', he adds (both in draft and fair copy):          
                                                                       
 '... Also I say to you that  your coming  to Minas  Tirith will  now be
 very  different  from  what  would  have  been,  had  you   come  there
 alone  reporting  that  Boromir son  of the  Lord Denethor  had fallen,
 while you lived....'                                                   
                                                                       
 In the  draft text  he tells  Aragorn that  he must  go now  to Winseld,
 changed to Eodoras  (see p.  402): 'The  light of  Branding must  now be
 uncovered. There is battle in Rohan and they are hard put to it  in the

 West, even as the great [? flood] of war comes  up from  the East.'  In the
 fair copy this  becomes: There  is war  in Rohan  and it  goes ill  for the
 horsemasters':  thus  again  (see  p.  401)  there   is  no   suggestion  of
 Wormtongue (cf.  TT p.  104: There  is war  in Rohan,  and worse  evil, it
 goes ill with Theoden').                                                   
                                                                           
   The textual development of the last part of this chapter and its        
 relation to the beginning of the next is complex and doubtful, the         
 manuscript material being very hard to interpret, and I shall not go       
 into the question in any detail. But it is clear that at least half of 'The
 King of the Golden Hall' had been written before the conclusion of         
 'The White Rider' approached at all the form it has in The Two             
 Towers; for as will be seen (p. 446) Aragorn tells Theoden in Eodoras      
 that Gandalf had not told them 'what befell him in Moria'.                 
   How my father ended 'The White Rider' at this stage is not entirely      
 clear to me, but it seems probable that he stopped at Gandalf's words      
 of the Balrog (TT p. 105): 'Name him not!': 'and for a moment it           
 seemed that a cloud of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent,      
 looking old as death.' He would then have begun a new chapter              
 (XXVII) at 'Gandalf now wrapped himself again in his old tattered          
 cloak. They descended quickly from the high shelf...' (TT p. 107).         
   I cannot say at what precise point my father decided that Gandalf        
 should in fact tell something at least of what had happened to him         
 after his fall from the Bridge of Khazad-dum, but it must have been in     
 the course of the writing of 'The King of the Golden Hall'. In what is     
 apparently the earliest draft (but written over erased pencil) of          
 Gandalf's story of his escape from Moria (4) the four companions are           
 already riding south from Fangorn when he tells it:                        
                                                                           
   On  the  way  they  ask  Gandalf  how  he  escaped.  He  refuses  the  full
   tale  -  but tells  how he  passed through  fire (and  water?) and  came to
   the  'bottom  of  the  world',  and  there  finally  overthrew  the Balrog,
   who  fled.  Gandalf  followed  up  a  secret  way to  Durin's Tower  on the
   summit  of  the  mountains  (?of  Caradras).  There  they  had  a  battle -
   those   who   beheld   it  afar   thought  it   was  a   thunderstorm  with
   lightning.  A  great  rain  came  down.  The  Balrog  was destroyed,  and .
   the tower crumbled and stones blocked the door of the secret way.        
   Gandalf  was  left  on   the  mountain-top.   The  eagle   Gwaihir  rescued
   him.  He  went  then  to  Lothlorien.  Galadriel   arrayed  him   in  white
   garments  before  he  left.  While  Gandalf  was  on  mountain  top  he saw
   many things - a vision of Mordor etc.                                    
                                                                           
 This is the first  appearance of  the form  Gwaihir (here  apparently first
 written  Gwaehir)  for earlier  Gwaewar, which  was still  the name  in the
 earlier part of this chapter.                                              
   A  very rough  and unfinished  draft for  the final  form and  placing of
 Gandalf's story  ('Long I  fell, and  he fell  with me...',  TT p.  105) is

                                       
                                                                           
 found.  Here Gandalf  describes the  Balrog, his  fire quenched,  thus: 'he
 was a thing of slime, strong as a strangling snake, sleek as ice, pliant as
 a  thong,  unbreakable  as  steel.'  Of  the  'dark things  unguessed' that
 gnaw  the  world  'below  the  deepest  delvings of  the dwarves'  he says:
 'Sauron  alone  may know  of them,  or one  older than  he.' And  after his
 words  'I  will  bring  no  report  to  stain  the light  of day'  the text
 continues:                                                                 
   '...Little  had  I  guessed  the  abyss  that  was  spanned   by  Durin's
 Bridge.'                                                                   
    'Did  you  not?'  said  Gimli.  'I could  have told  you had  there been
 time.  No  plummet  ever  found  the   bottom  -   indeed  none   that  was
 ever cast therein was ever recovered.'(5)                                  
                                                                           
   The  form  of  Gandalf's  story  in  TT  is almost  reached in  the 'fair
 copy'  manuscript,  but  there  remain  some  differences.  He  tells  that
 clutching at the Balrog's heel 'I set my teeth in it like a  hunting hound,
 and  tasted  venom';  and  that  Durin's  Tower was  'carved in  the living
 rock  in  the  very  pinnacle  of  red  Caradras.'  This  was  subsequently
 changed  to  'the  living  rock  [of]  Zirakinbar,(6) the  pinnacle   of  the
 Silverhorn.  There  upon  Kelebras  was  a  lonely  window in  the snow...'
 On these names see pp. 174 - 5, notes 18, 21 - 2.                          
   Gandalf  does  not  say, as  in TT  (p. 106),  'Naked I  was sent  back -
 for a brief time, until my  task is  done', but  simply 'Naked  I returned,
 and  naked  I  lay  upon  the mountain-top.'(7) And of  his coming  thence to
 Caras  Galadon,  borne  by  Gwaihir,  he  says  that  he  'found  you three
 days gone',  and that  he 'tarried  there in  the long  time which  in that
 land counts for but a brief hour  of the  world' ('in  the ageless  time of
 that land', TT): see pp. 368 - 9.                                          
   At  this  time  the  messages  that  he  bore  from Galadriel  to Aragorn
 and Legolas were very different:                                           
                                                                           
        Elfstone, Elfstone, bearer of my green stone,                       
        In the south under snow a green stone thou shalt see.               
        Look well, Elfstone! In the shadow of the dark throne               
        Then the hour is at hand that long hath awaited thee.               
                                                                           
        Greenleaf, Greenleaf, bearer of the elven-bow,                      
        Far beyond Mirkwood many trees on earth grow.                       
        Thy last shaft when thou hast shot, under strange trees             
                                       shalt thou go!                       
                                                                           
 The dialogue  that  follows,  between  Gimli,  Legolas,  and   Gandalf,  is
 however precisely the same as in  TT, p.  107. On  the significance  of the
 verse addressed to Aragorn see p. 448.                                     
                                                                           
            With the addition of Gandalf's story to this chapter, what was
    originally the opening of 'The King of the Golden Hall' (from 'Gandalf
   now wrapped himself again in his old tattered cloak', see p. 430) was

                                      
                                                                        
 incorporated  into  'The  White  Rider',  which  now  ended  at Gandalf's
 words  'Show  no  weapon,  speak  no  haughty  word,  I counsel  you all,
 until we are  come before  Theoden's seat'  (TT p.  111). The  final form
 of  the  story  of  the  departure  from  Fangorn,  the summoning  of the
 horses, the great ride south across the plains with  the sight  at sunset
 of smoke rising far off  in the  Gap of  Rohan, and  the distant  view of
 Eodoras at sunrise (TT pp. 107 - 11, where it constitutes the end  of the
 one chapter  and the  beginning of  the next),  was achieved  almost down
 to the last detail in the fair copy  manuscript.(8) By  this time  my father
 had changed the ending  of 'The  Riders of  Rohan' (p.  403) to  the form
 it has in TT, pp. 45 - 6 ('The horses were gone.  They had  dragged their
 pickets  and  disappeared'),  and  had  changed  the  beginning  of  'The
 White Rider' similarly to its form in TT, p.  91 ('  "Did you  hear them,
 Legolas?  Did  they  sound  to  you  like beasts  in terror?"  "No," said
 Legolas.  "I  heard  them  clearly....I  should  have  guessed  that they
 were beasts wild with some sudden gladness" ').                         
                                                                        
                                   NOTES.                                
                                                                        
 1. A little slip of paper used to  draft the  moment of  recognition of
   Mithrandir  (TT  p.  98)  was  a  page  from  an  engagement  calendar
   'for the  week ending  Saturday February  22'. February  22 fell  on a
   Saturday in 1941, not in 1942.                                        
 2.  The  forerunner of  this phrase  appeared in  the outline  given on
   p. 389, as also  did 'I  was badly  burned or  well burned';  cf. also
   the  notes  given on  p. 422.  Gandalf's suggestion  that he  now 'is'
   Saruman, in the sense that  he is  'Saruman as  he should  have been',
   is lacking, but appears in the fair copy as first written.            
 3. Gandalf's words  that follow  in TT:  'There was  a darkness  over the
   valleys of the Emyn Muil' are absent in  the draft,  but are  found in
   the fair copy (with Sarn Gebir for the Emyn Muil).                    
 4. For the earliest  notes on  Gandalf's escape  from Moria  see VI.462
   and p. 211 in this book.                                              
 5. It is interesting to look back to my father's original ideas about the
   chasm in the passages referred to in note 4: 'probably fall is  not as
   deep  as  it  seemed... eventually  following the  subterranean stream
   in the gulf he found a way out', and 'The  gulf was  not deep  (only a
   kind of moat and was full of  silent water).  He followed  the channel
   and got down into the Deeps.'                                         
 6.  This  form  Zirakinbar,  preceding  Zirakzigil, is  found also  in an
   entirely   isolated   note:   'Barazinbar,   Zirakinbar,  Udushinbar',
   together with a reference to 'Silverhorn and the Horn of Cloud'.      
 7.  Cf.  Letters  no.  156  (4  November  1954),  Naked  I was  sent back
   - for a brief time, until my  task is  done." Sent  back by  whom, and
   whence?  Not  by  the  "gods"  whose  business   is  only   with  this
   embodied  world  and  its  time;  for  he passed  "out of  thought and

 time".  Naked  is  alas!  unclear.  It was  meant just  literally, "un-
 clothed like a child"  (not discarnate),  and so  ready to  receive the
 white robes of the highest. Galadriel's  power is  not divine,  and his
 healing in Lorien  is meant  to be  no more  than physical  healing and
 refreshment.'                                                          
8.  Initial drafting is very largely lost through overwriting. - The only
 points of any significance in which the text of  the fair  copy differs
 from that of  TT, other  than names,  are that  Theoden is  the 'Master
 of  Rohan'  and 'lord  of the  Mark' where  in TT  he is  called 'King'
 (see  p. 444);  that Gandalf  says to  Shadowfax 'Far  let us  ride now
 together, ere we part  again!' where  in TT  he says  'and part  not in
 this world again!'; and that 'the  mountains of  the South'  (the Black
 Mountains)  are  'black-tipped  and  streaked  with white',  whereas in
 TT,  where  they  are  the  White  Mountains,  they  are  'white-tipped
 and streaked with black': cf. the earlier description in 'The Riders of
 Rohan'  (TT  p. 24),  where the  original text  was retained  (p. 395),
 'rising into peaks of jet, tipped with glimmering snows'.              
   Among   names,  Sarn   Gebir  (for   Emyn  Muil),   Winseld,  Eodoras
 are still present. At the end of the chapter, in Gandalf's  phrase 'the
 Horse-masters  do  not  sleep'  (TT  p.  111),  the  form   Rohir  (not
 Rohiroth) was written above.                                           

                                     XXV.                                  
                           THE STORY FORESEEN FROM                         
                                   FANGORN.                                
                                                                          
 In this chapter I give two  outlines of  great interest,  for in  them my
 father discussed the structural problems of  the story  that he  foresaw at
 this  time.  The  first  one  given  here was  evidently written  when 'The
 White  Rider'  had  been  completed  in  its  earlier  form  (i.e.  without
 Gandalf's  story of  the Balrog,  see p.  430); the  ride across  Rohan and
 the  distant  sight  of  Eodoras  in  the  morning  may  or  may  not  have
 existed yet, but the question is immaterial.                              
                                                                          
 XXVII                                                                     
 Gandalf,  Aragorn, Legolas,  Gimli reach  Eodoras on  the morn-           
 ing of Jan.  31.(1) (That  aft[ernoon] Merry  and Pippin  go with           
 Ents to Isengard.)                                                        
  They enter Theoden's halls.  Theoden greets  Gandalf dubiously           
 -  as  herald of  trouble. Shadowfax  had been  reported coming           
 from  the West  through the  Gap and  fleeing away  north.(2) They           
 feared  Gandalf  would  return.  Then  Eomer  had  come  riding           
 back, with strange news concerning Gandalf's fall. 'That,' said           
 Theoden,  'was  too  much to  hope, it  seems; for  now Gandalf           
 returns and worse tidings follow.'                                        
                                                                          
 Against  this paragraph  was written  in the  margin, at  the same  time as
 the text, 'A messenger from Minas Tirith is present.'                     
                                                                          
  There is a battle on the borders of the West Emnet. An                  
 invasion of Orcs of Saruman had been driven back (not without             
 loss to the Rohiroth) to the banks of the Isen River. But news            
 came that orcs were pouring out of Isengard, and that men of              
 the Middlemarch (3) (whom Saruman had long subjected) were                    
 coming up. 'We cannot hope long to hold the river,' said                  
 Theoden. 'Eomer has gone thither with what men could still be             
 spared. And now as we are beset in the West, there comes dire             
 news indeed. The whole of Rhun the Great, the endless East, is            
 in motion. Under the command of the Dark Lord of Mordor                   
 they move from the far North even to the South. Minas Tirith is           
 beset. The fierce dark men of the South, the Haradwaith                   

                             
                                                                       
 (Harwan   Silharrows    Men   of    Sunharrowland   Men    of   Harrow-
 land)  have  come  in  many  ships  and  fill the  Bay of  Belfalas, and
 [have]  taken  the   isle  of   Tolfalas.  They   have  passed   up  the
 Anduin  in  many  galleys,  and  out  of  Mordor  others  have  crossed
 at  Elostirion.(4) A  tide  of  war  rolls  beneath  the  very  walls  of
 Minas  Tirith.  They  have  sent  us  urgent  prayer  for help.  And we
 cannot  give  it.  Yet if  Minas Tirith  falls then  the dark  tide will
 sweep over us from the East.                                           
                                                                       
 Against  this  passage  concerning  Minas  Tirith  was  written  in the
 margin, at  the same  time as  the text,  'Not yet  have they  heard of
 Boromir's  fall.'  Later, the  whole passage  from 'And  now as  we are
 beset in the West' to this point was closed off in pencil with the note
 'place after return victorious from Isengard.' Theoden continues:      
                                                                       
 You  come  at  the  end  of  the  days  of  Rohan.  Not long  now shall
 the  hall  (which  Brego  son  of  Brytta [changed  later in  pencil to
 Eorl  son of  Eofor] built)(5) stand. Fire  shall eat  up the  high seat.
 What can you say?'                                                     
 Gandalf  speaks  words  of  comfort.  All  that  can  be  done   is  to
 do  one  deed  at  a  time and  go forward  and not  look back.  Let us
 assail  Saruman and  then if  fortune is  with us  turn and  face East.
 There  is  a  hope.  Something  may  happen  in   West  (he   does  not
 openly name Ents).                                                     
 Gandalf begs for the gift of Shadowfax.                                
 Theoden  says  Yes  -  that  will  at  least  ensure  Gandalf's escape,
 when  all  else  fall.  Gandalf  does  not lose  temper. He  says there
 will  be  no escape  for anyone.  But he  wishes for  gift, as  he will
 take Shadowfax into great peril: silver against black.                 
 The  ceremony  of  gift.  Gandalf  casts  aside   grey  robe   and  be-
 comes  White  Rider.  He  bids  Theoden   arm,  old   as  he   is,  and
 follow  with  all  left  who  can bear  arms. The  rest shall  pack and
 prepare to flee to the mountains.                                      
 They   ride  off   without  rest.   Meet  messengers   reporting  death
 of  the  Second  Master  and   the  forces   of  Rohan   hemmed  almost
 in, while the forces of Saruman are continually strengthened.          
 Gandalf spurs Shadowfax and spurs into the setting sun.                
 By  his  help  and  Aragorn  the  Isengarders  are  driven   back.  The
 camp of the Rohiroth. But Isengarders are across the river.            
 In  the  morning  they   awake  and   look  out   in  wonder.   A  wood
 stood  where   none  had   been,  between   the  Isengarders   and  the
 West.  There  is  clamour  and  confusion.   Vast  columns   of  vapour
 are  seen  rising  from  Isengard,  and  the  rumour of  strange noises

 and rumblings. The Isengarders are driven into the river. Those
 who cross are suddenly assailed by the trees which seem to come
 to life. Only a few escape fleeing southward to the Black        
 Mountains.                                                       
   The victorious forces under Eomer and Gandalf ride to the      
 gates of Isengard. They find it a pile of rubble, blocked with a
 huge wall of stone. On the top of the pile sit Merry and Pippin!
   Meeting of Treebeard and Gandalf.                              
   How did the Ents overcome Isengard? They open[ed] sluice       
 gates at North end and blocked the outlet near the Great Gate.
 First they watched all the night seeing more and more orcs etc.
 pour out of Isengard. Then they simply broke a way in at North
 end and spied and found Saruman was left nearly all alone in     
 his tower. They broke the door and stairway to the tower and     
 then withdrew. At North end they let in the River Isen but       
 blocked its outflow. Soon all the floor of the circle was flooded
 to many feet deep. Then while some kept guard the rest fell on
 the rear of the battle.                                          
   Here comes scene of Saruman being let out of his tower and     
 trying to speak in friendly fashion to Gandalf. 'Ah, my dear     
 Gandalf! I am so pleased to see you; we at least (we wizards)
 understand one another. These people all seem so unnecessarily
 angry.(6) What a mess the world is in. Really you and I must        
 consult together - such men as we are needed. Now what about .
 our spheres of influence?'                                       
   Gandalf looks at him and laughs. 'Yes, I understand you well
 enough, Saruman. Give me your staff,' he said in a voice of      
 terrible command. He took it and broke it. 'I am the White       
 Wizard now,' he said. 'Behold you are clad in many colours!'     
 They turn his coat inside out. Gandalf gives him a rough staff.
 [Added subsequently: Saruman is to go without a staff, and       
 have no wooden thing to lean on by decree of Treebeard.] 'Go     
 Saruman!' he said, 'and beg from the charitable for a day's      
 digging.'(7) [Added subsequently: Or put this toward end of story
 - in meanwhile give Saruman over to the guard of the Ents.       
 Further addition: Yes.]                                          
   [Written in margin at the same time as the text: Better: the
 ring of Isengard is broken by Ents, but Saruman shuts himself
 up in Orthanc and cannot be assailed yet for there is no time.]
                                                                 
   Another way of telling the story would be to carry on from     
 end of Chapter XXVI and relate the coming of Ents to             

 Icengard.(8) How they resolved not to break in at first,  but came             
 behind the orc-army. Let Merry and Pippin see the orcs driving             
 the men of Rohan back over the River. Ents camp behind them.
 Then relate the battle from Merry and Pippin's point of view -
 distant vision of the white  rider on  a shining  horse. They            
 recognize  the  sword  and voice  of Aragorn,  but do  not know            
 who the White Rider is. Gandalf and  Treebeard meet  after the            
 battle - and then comes  the storming  of Isengard  by Gandalf            
 and the Ents.                                                             
    Return to Eodoras. Funeral of - the Second Master (9)                  
 [Added  above:   Hama  and   Theodred].  Feast   in  Winseld.(10)         
 Eowyn sister of Eomer waits on the guests. Description  of her,            
 and of her love for Aragorn.                                              
    News comes at the  feast or  next morning  of the  siege of            
 Minas   Tirith  by   the  Haradwaith.(11) [Added  subsequently:            
 brought  by a  dark Gondorian  like Boromir.(12) Theoden answers            
 that he does not owe fealty - only to heirs of Elendil. But he            
 will come.]  The horsemen  of Rohan  ride East,  with Gandalf,            
 Aragorn,  Gimli,  Legolas,  Merry and  Pippin. Gandalf  as the            
 White  Rider.  [Added  subsequently:  Eowyn  goes  as Amazon.]            
 Vision of Minas Tirith from afar.                                         
                                                                          
 In the part of this outline that  concerns the  immediate story  to come,
 and with which this  book ends,  it will  be seen  that while  Theoden is
 unwelcoming   and   scarcely   well-disposed   towards  Gandalf,   he  is
 nothing more than  that: of  the ugly  state of  affairs at  Eodoras that
 came  in  with  Wormtongue  there  is  no   trace  -   no  hint   of  the
 subjugation  of  Theoden's  mind and  will, of  the disgracing  of Eomer,
 of Gandalf's  triumphant display  of his  power in  the hall  of Winseld.
 Eowyn,  Eomer's  sister,  appears,  and  her  love  for Aragorn,  but not
 until the funeral feast held in Winseld after the victory.                 
                                                                          
 Judging  by  the  opening  of the  second outline,  this also  belongs to
 about this time.                                                          
                                                                          
 Order o f Tale.                                                           
 Bring  each  party  to  crisis. Ents  break off  with 'Night  lies over
 Isengard'.  End  XXVI  with  far  vision   of  Winseld's   golden  roof
 (and  sight  of  the  smoke).(13) (Possibly  they  see  men  in  strange
 armour riding also from East to Eodoras.)                                 
                                                                          
 Now return  to Frodo  and Sam.  Meeting with  Gollum. Betrayal            
 by him. Capture of Frodo on west side of Kirith  Ungol. Frodo            
 imprisoned in tower (14) - because (a) no ring is on him, (b) Sauron            
 is busy with war and it takes time for message to reach him.               

 Then return to Gandalf and battle of Isen, feast of  victory, relief
 of Minas Tirith, and march of the army of Gandalf towards          
 Dagorlad and gates of Kirith Ungol.                                
 Then  return  to  Frodo.  Make  him   look  out   onto  impenetrable
 night. Then use phial  which has  escaped (clutched  in his  hand or
 wrapped in  rag). By  its light  he sees  the forces  of deliverance
 approach  and  the  dark  host go  out to  meet them.(15) Grieves for.
 Sam - or thinks he has betrayed him too.                           
   The  orc-guards   come  on   him  and   take  phial   and  shutter
 windows, and he lies in dark and despair.                          
                                                                   
 Where  put  parley  of  Sauron  and  Gandalf?  If  after  capture of
 Frodo  readers  will know  that Frodo  [written above:  Sauron] hag
 not  Ring.  [Added  subsequently  in  two  stages:  No,  not  if you
 break off  with Frodo  carried off  by Orcs  and before  Sam rescues
 him. /  Even if  Sam's taking  of Ring  is told,(16) you can  make Sam
 fly among the  rocks with  Gollum (and  orcs) on  his trail  and his
 escape seem unlikely.)                                             
                                                                   
   Possibly best as originally  planned -  [?all account]  of Gandalf
 as far as Kirith Ungol - and then return to Sam and Frodo.         
   Sam  rescues  Frodo  and  while  battle  is  joined  at  mouth  of
 Gorgoroth they fly towards Orodruin.                               

                         NOTES.                                    
                                                                  
1.  The later date of the  departure of  the Company  from Rivendell,
 25 December, had now entered (see pp. 422 - 3):  thus 'Day  1' (the
 day of Boromir's  death) in  the table  on p.  406 was  January 25.
 (see  the  table  on  p.  368),  and  Aragorn,  Legolas  and  Gimli
 encountered Gandalf in Fangorn on January 30 ('Day 5').           
2.  In the fifth version of 'The Council of Elrond' (p.  152) Gandalf
 does  not say  what happened  to Shadowfax,  but the  isolated note
 given  on  p.  390  says  that  'some account  of Shadowfax  in the
 house of Elrond must be given.' This note asks also,  however, 'Or
 did he just run off after Gandalf got to Rivendell?', and  'How did
 Gandalf  summon  him?'  In  preliminary  notes  for 'The  Riders of
 Rohan' (p. 390) it is said  that 'the  horse of  Gandalf reappears-
 sent for  from Rivendell';  and in  the text  of that  chapter (pp.
 400  -  1)  Eomer  tells Aragorn  that he  had returned  seven days
 before,  to  which  Aragorn  replies:  'But Gandalf  left Shadowfax
 far in the North at  Rivendell. Or  so I  thought.' In  the present
 passage  Shadowfax  had  recently  come  out  of  the  West  through

    the  Gap  of  Rohan  and  then  gone   away  north:   which  surely
    suggests that he had  come from  Rivendell and  was going  north to
    Fangorn  in  obedience  to  a  summons  from  Gandalf  mysteriously
    conveyed to him.                                                   
      The  earliest  extant  account  of  Gandalf's summons  to Shadow-
    fax with his three great whistles, and his coming across  the plain
    to  the  eaves  of  Fangorn  with  Arod  and Hasofel  returning, is
    already exactly as in TT (see p. 432);  and this  seems to  fit the
    story in the present text, for Gandalf says to  Shadowfax 'It  is a
    long way from Rivendell,  my friend;  but you  are wise  and swift,
    and  come  at  need,' and  he says  to Legolas  'I bent  my thought
    upon  him,  bidding him  to make  haste; for  yesterday he  was far
    away in the south of this land.' (On the  other hand,  Legolas says
    'I have  not seen  his like  before', which  does not  suggest that
    Shadowfax had been at Rivendell when the Company was there.)       
      The story in the published  LR is  extremely difficult  to under-
    stand. In 'The Council  of Elrond'  (FR p.  278) Gandalf  says: 'It
    took  me  nearly  fourteen days  from Weathertop,  for I  could not
    ride among the rocks  of the  troll-fells, and  Shadowfax departed.
    I sent him back to  his master...'  This was  about October  4. The
    next we hear is in 'The Riders of Rohan',  where Eomer  still tells
    Aragorn  that  Shadowfax  had  returned  'seven  nights  ago'  (but
    'now the horse is wild and will let no man  handle him'),  to which
    Aragorn  replies:  'Then  Shadowfax  has found  his way  alone from
    the far North; for it was there that he and Gandalf parted.' But it
    was  now  February 30,  so that  on his  return nearly  five months
    had  elapsed  since  Gandalf  dismissed  him  at   Weathertop!  And
    then, at the end of 'The  White Rider'  (TT p.  108), there  is the
    passage already cited: 'It is a long way from Rivendell, my friend;
    but you are wise and swift and come at need.' It is hard  to resist
    the  conclusion  that  the  alteration  in  Gandalf's story  to the
    Council of Elrond was not carried through.                         
 3.  Middlemarch:  Enedwaith,  between  Greyflood  and   Anduin;  see
    Maps II and III, pp. 305, 309.                                     
 4.  Cf.  the  outline  given on  p. 389:  'Minas Tirith  defeats Harad-
    waith.'  -  All  these   names  (Harwan,   Silharrows;  Harrowland,
    Sunharrowland)  are  derived  from  the  Old  English  Sigelhearwan
    'Ethiopians'. My father's article in  two parts  entitled Sigelwara
    land  (Medium AEvum  1  and  3,  Dec.1932  and June  1934) studied
    the   etymology  and   meaning  of   the  name   Sigelhearwan,  and
    concluded that while  the meaning  of the  first element  Sigel was
    certainly  'Sun',  that  of  the  second  element  hearwan  was not
    discoverable, a symbol ... of  that large  part of  ancient English
    language  and lore  which has  now vanished  beyond recall,  swa hit
    no maere [as if it had never been].' With these names cf. Sunlands,
    Swertings, p. 313. - Tolfalas  appears on  the original  element of

     the First Map (see p. 298, and Map III" on p. 308). - On           
     Elostirion for Osgiliath see p. 423.                               
  5. In LR the father of Eorl was Leod, and Brego was Eorl's son;       
     Brytta  was  the  eleventh King  of the  Mark, some  two and  a half
     centuries after Brego (see LR Appendix A (II)).                    
  6. These remarks of  Saruman's, from  'we at  least...', were  brack-
     eted at the time of writing.                                       
  7. This  sketch  of  the  'affable' Saruman  and Gandalf's  breaking of
     his staff is derived very closely from 'The Story Foreseen from    
     Moria', p. 212; cf. also p. 422.                                   
  8. Chapter XXVI is 'The White Rider'.                                 
  9. The  Second  Master  was  first  called Marhath  (p. 390;  this name
     was then given to the Fourth Master, p. 400), then Eowin (pp.      
     393 - 4).                                                          
 10. For the name of the Golden Hall see p. 402.                        
 11. Thus the passage on pp. 434  - 5  (in which  Theoden in  his initial
     conversation  with  Gandalf  speaks  of  the  attack  by  the Harad-
     waith on Minas Tirith)  bracketed with  the note  that it  should be
     placed  after  the  victorious  return to  Eodoras has  already been
     moved.                                                             
 12. I  have  not  found  an  explanation  of  the  conception underlying
     this.  Possibly to  be compared  are Gandalf's  words in  The Return
     of  the  King,  Ch.  1  Minas  Tirith,  p.  31:  by some  chance the
     blood of Westernesse  runs nearly  true in  him; as  it does  in his
     other  son,  Faramir,  and  yet  did  not in  Boromir whom  he loved
     hest.' But this was written several years later.                   
 13. The smoke seen rising at sunset of the day  before in  the direction
     of the Gap of Rohan (p. 432).                                      
 14. On  the  taking  of  Frodo to  a guard-tower  (not to  Minas Morgul)
     see p. 344 and note 39, and p. 412.                                
 15. The light of the Phial of Galadriel must be conceived here to  be of
     huge power, a veritable star in the darkness.                      
 16. I  do not  follow the  thought here:  for Sam's  taking of  the Ring
     must in any case be told before Frodo is carried off by the Orcs.

                                    XXVI.                                 
                        THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL.                      
                                                                         
 The textual  history of  this chapter  is much  the same  as that  of 'The
 White  Rider':  the  first  coherent and  legible manuscript  is also  in a
 sense the first extant text of the chapter, because  the rough  drafts were
 set  down,  section  by  section,  as  the  main manuscript  proceeded. In
 other  words,  that  manuscript  was  the  vehicle  of the  development of
 the narrative, and the distinction between 'draft' and  'fair copy'  is not
 at all a  distinction between  two separate  manuscript entities,  the one
 completed as a whole before the  other was  begun. For  almost all  of the
 last third of the chapter, however, there is no independent  drafting, for
 the initial conception in pencil was overwritten in ink.                 
  A  substantial  part  of the  chapter was  in being  in some  form before
 Gandalf's  story of  the Balrog  was added  to 'The  White Rider'  (see p.
 430), and the point of separation of 'The  King of  the Golden  Hall' (not
 so named) from 'The White Rider' was twice changed.(1)                   
  In the  earliest stage  of the  narrative, abandoned  before it  had gone
 far,  Gandalf  (with  Gimli)  left  Aragorn and  Legolas before  they came
 to Eodoras:                                                              
                                                                         
  'Eodoras   those  courts   are  called,'   said  Gandalf,   'and  Winseld
 is  that  golden  hall.  There  dwells  Theoden (2) son  of   Thengel,  lord
 of  the  mark  of  Rohan.  We  are  come  with  the  rising  of  the  day.
 Now  the  road  lies  plain  to  see  before  you.  Make  what  speed  you
 may!'                                                                   
  Then   suddenly   he   spoke   to   Shadowfax,   and   like    an   arrow
 from   the   bow   the   great   horse  sprang   forward.  Even   as  they
 gazed, he was  gone: a  flash of  silver, a  wind in  the grass,  a vision
 that fled and faded from their sight.                                    
  Swiftly  they  urged   their  horses   in  pursuit,   but  if   they  had
 Walked  upon  their  feet  they  would   have  had   as  much   chance  of
 overtaking  him.   They  had   gone  only   a  small   part  of   the  way
 When   Legolas   exclaimed:   'That   was   a   mighty   leap!   Shadowfax
 has   sprung   across   the   mountain   stream   and   already   he   has
 passed up the hill and vanished from my sight.'                          
  The  morning  was   bright  and   clear  about   them,  and   birds  were
 singing,  when   Aragorn  and   Legolas  came   to  the   stream;  running
 swiftly  down  into  the  plain it  bent across  their path,  turning east

 to  feed  the  Entwash  away  to  the   left  in   its  marshy   bed.  Here
 there   were   many   willow-trees,   already   in   this   southern   land
 blushing  red  at  the  tips  of  twigs  in presage  of spring.  They found
 a   ford,   much   trampled   upon   either  bank   with  the   passage  of
 horses,  and  passed  over,  and  so  at  length  they  too  rode  up along
 the green road to Eodoras.                                                 
   At  the  foot  of  the  hill  they  passed   between  seven   high  green
 mounds.  Already   they  were   starred  with   small  pale   flowers,  and
 in  the  shelter  of  their  western  flanks  the  grass  was   white  with
 nodding   flowers   (blossoms)  like   tiny  snowdrops.   'See,  Legolas!'
 said   Aragorn,   'we   are  passing   the  mounds   where  the   sires  of
 Theoden   sleep.'   'Yes,'   said   Legolas.   'Seven   mounds   there  be,
 and  seven  long  lives  of  men  it  is,  since  the Rohiroth  came hither
 from   the   North.   Two   hundred   times   and   more   have   the   red
 leaves   fallen   in   Mirkwood  in   my  home   since  then,(3) and  little
 change  does  it  seem  to  us.  But  to them  it seems  so long  ago, that
 their  dwelling  in  the  North  is  but  a  memory  of  song,   and  their
 speech is already sundered from their northern kin.'                       
   The   companions    entered   the    gates.   Horsemen    guarded   them,
 and  led  them  to  the  hall.  They  dismounted  and  walked  in   up  the
 echoing   hall.  There   they  saw   Theoden  the   old.  Beside   him  sat
 Gandalf, and at his feet Gimli the dwarf.                                  
                                                                           
 At the foot of the page, where this  draft ends,  is the  note: '?  News of
 the attack on Minas Tirith by Haradwaith in ships'; see pp. 434 - 5, 437.
   It would be interesting to  know what  thought lay  behind this  story of
 the 'divided entry' into Eodoras; but  whatever it  was, the  arrival there
 and  even  the  entry  into  Winseld  was  accomplished,  as   it  appears,
 without  any ceremony,  interrogation, or  laying aside  of arms.  There is
 no suggestion of  hostility or  even suspicion  towards the  strangers, and
 this accords with the first outline given in the last chapter (see p. 437).
 It  will  be  seen  in  what  follows  that  the  entire conception  of the
 situation  at  Eodoras  arose  during  the  writing  of  'The  King  of the
 Golden Hall'.                                                              
                                                                           
   While the story of the  divided entry  of the  four companions  was still
 maintained,  however,   a  strongly   'Beowulfian'  reception   of  Aragorn
 and Legolas at the gates was at once introduced, in a revised draft.(4)    
                                                                           
 ... they came at last to the wide windswept walls and the gates            
 of Eodoras. There  sat men  in bright  mail upon  proud steeds,            
 who spoke to them in a strange tongue.                                     
   'Abidath  cuman uncuthe!  [Rejected at  the time  of writing:            
 Hwaet sindon ge, lathe oththe leofe, the thus  seldlice gewerede            
 ridan cwomon to thisse  barge gatum?  No her  inn gan  moton ne            

 waedla  ne  waepned  mon,  nefne  we  his  naman  witen.  Nu ge           
 feorran-cumene  gecythath  us  on ofste:  hu hatton  ge? hwaet           
 sindon  eower aerende  to  Theoden  urum   hlaforde?(5) Aragorn           
 understood these words] asking their names and  errand. These           
 words  Aragorn  understood  and  answered.  'Aragorn  son  of           
 Arathorn am I,' he said, 'and with me is Legolas of Mirkwood.           
 These names maybe ye have  already heard,  and our  coming is           
 awaited? But  we ask  now to  see Theoden  your lord;  for we           
 come in friendship and it may be that our coming                        
                                                                        
 Here this draft tails off. It does not seem that the story  that Gandalf
 with  Gimli  went  ahead  on  Shadowfax  and  entered Eodoras  first was
 taken  any  further. It  is curious,  however, that  when the  story was
 changed my father  seems to  have forgotten  Gimli: he  is not  named in
 the encounter with the guard at the gates,  there is  no mention  of his
 surrendering  his axe  at the  doors of  the house,  and my  father even
 wrote  'Now  the  three  companions  went  forward'  up  Theoden's hall.
 These  references  were  added  in  to the  'fair copy'  manuscript, and
 'three' changed to 'four';  and Gimli  appears as  the text  was written
 when  he  strode  forward, and  was restrained  by Gandalf,  at Wormton-
 gue's words about Lothlorien (TT p. 118). I do not  think that  this can
 have any narrative significance; but it was certainly an odd  lapse, and
 not easy to explain.(6)                                                 
   The story of the  arrival at  Eodoras was  now revised  again. Gandalf
 is present  when the  travellers are  challenged at  the gates,  and the
 guards,  crying  Abidath  cuman uncuthe,  are rebuked  by him  for using
 the tongue  of Rohan.(7) The flowers  on the  mounds (still  seven) become
 nifredil, the flowers of  Lorien (see  note 4,  and pp.  233 -  4); and
 Aragorn  utters  the  verse  Where  now  the   horse  and   the  rider?,(8)
 referring to 'Eorl the Old', changed at once to  'Eorl the  Young', 'who
 rode  down  out  of the  North', and  to 'his  steed Felarof,  father of
 horses'  (TT  p.  112).  But  at  this  stage  Wormtongue had  still not
 emerged,  and  the  suspicion  and  hostility  of  the  guards evidently
 proceeded   from   Theoden's   unfortified   dislike  and   distrust  of
 Gandalf;(9) moreover  Eomer  had  not  returned  to  Eodoras   since  Ara-
 gorn, Legolas and Gimli parted from him:                                
                                                                        
 '".Has   not   Eomer   then   returned   and   given  warning   of  our
 coming?'                                                                
   'Nay,'  said  the  guard.  'He  has  not passed  these gates.  He was
 turned  aside   by  messengers   from  Theoden,   and  went   away  west
 to  the  war  without  staying.  But maybe,  if what  you say  is true,
 Theoden  will  have  knowledge  of  it.  I  will  go  to  my   lord  and
 learn his will. But what names shall I report? ...'                     
                                                                        
 'With this cf. TT p. 113. - In the original draft for the scene in which

 the travellers  must lay  aside their  weapons before  entering Theoden's
 house there is a brief description of it:                                
                                                                         
 Before Theoden's hall there was a portico, with pillars made of          
 mighty  trees  hewn  in  the  upland  forests and  carved with          
 interlacing figures gilded and painted. The doors also  were of          
 wood,  carven in  the likeness  of many  beasts and  birds with          
 jewelled eyes and golden claws.                                          
                                                                         
 It is curious that in the 'fair copy' manuscript, and thence in the final
 text, there is no description at all of the exterior of the house,  and I
 think that it may have  got lost  in the  complexities of  redrafting and
 reordering of the material.(10)                                         
   As they stood  in the  darkness by  the doors  of the  hall and  saw on
 one of the hangings the  figure of  the young  man on  a white  horse (TT
 p. 116) Aragorn said: 'Behold Eorl  the Young!  Thus he  rode out  of the
 North to the Battle of the Field  of Gorgoroth.'  A very  difficult draft
 preceding  this   has  'the   Battle  of   Gorgoroth  where   Sauron  was
 [?overthrown],' making it clear that  at this  stage my  father conceived
 that Eorl came south to the great battle in  which Gil-galad  and Elendil
 were slain and Isildur took the Ring.(11)                                
   In  the  encounter  with Theoden  the manuscript  evidence is  not very
 easy to interpret, but it seems certain that  it was  at this  point that
 Wormtongue entered the  story; for  what is  obviously the  very earliest
 description of Theoden, written in the faintest scribble, reads thus:
                                                                         
 At  the  far  end  of the  hall beyond  the hearth  and facing  the doors
 was  a  dais  with  three  steps,  and  in the  midst of  the dais  was a
 great  chair.  In  the  chair  sat  a  man  so  bent  with  age  that  he
 seemed  almost  a  dwarf.  His  white  hair   was  [?braided]   upon  his
 [?shoulders),  his  long  beard  was  laid  upon   his  knees.   But  his
 eyes  burned  with  a  keen  light  that  glinted  from afar  off. Behind
 his  chair  stood  two  fair  women.  At his  feet upon  the steps  sat a
 wizened  [struck  out:  old]  figure  of  a  man with  a pale  wise face.
 There was a silence.                                                     
                                                                         
 In the 'fair copy' the text moves close to that of TT (pp. 116 - 17), and
 now  appears  the  'thin  golden  circlet'  worn   by  Theoden   (who  is
 subsequently  called  'King'  in this  manuscript); but  he bears  on his
 forehead 'a large green  stone' (not  the 'single  white diamond'  of TT:
 see p. 448), and there were still  'two fair  women' standing  behind his
 chair.                                                                   
   But  though  Wormtongue  was  present  he  did  not,  as the  scene was
 first drafted, intervene, and it is Theoden  who speaks  of the  death of
 the  Second  Master  of  the  Mark,  here  called  Eofored,(12) on  the west
 marches  of  Rohan,  and  it  is  Theoden  who  names  Gandalf Lathspell,

  Ill-news.  Gandalf  responds, as  in TT,  by speaking  of the  different ways
  which  a  man  may  come  with  evil  tidings,  and  it  is  again Theoden,
  not  Wormtongue,  who  retorts  'Verily he  may, or  he may  be of  a third
  kind',  and who  decries the  idea that  Gandalf had  ever brought  aid to
  Rohan:  Last  time  it  seemed  to  me that  you asked  my aid  rather, and
  to  get  you  from  my  land  I  astonished  all  men  and  myself  also by
  lending  you  Shadowfax.'(13) At  this  stage  Eomer s  story remains  as it
  was: 'Eomer has  ridden away  thither [to  the west  marches] with  all but
  the last handful of my horsemen.'                                           
    At  this  point,  however,  before  the  conversation  had  proceeded any
  further, 'the pale man sitting upon the steps of the dais' began to  play a
  part;  for  he  now took  over those  parts of  Theoden's remarks  that are
  given to him in TT. Yet it  is interesting  to observe  that my  father did
  not  introduce  him  into  Theoden's  household  with the  conscious intent
  that he should play the role that he did in fact come to play: for he still
  says,  as  Theoden  had  done,  'Now  Eomer  has  ridden away  thither with
  all but our last handful of horsemen.'(14)                                
    After  Gandalf's  triumph  over   Wormtongue  (who   is  not   yet  given
  any  other  name)  Theoden  is  assisted down  the hall  by the  two women,
  and he says to them: 'Go, Idis, and you too Eowyn sister-daughter!'(15)   
  As  they went,  the younger  of them  looked back:  'very fair  and slender
  she  seemed.  Her  face was  filled with  gentle pity,  and her  eyes shone
  with unshed tears. So Aragorn saw her for the  first time  in the  light of
  day, and  after she  was gone  he stood  still, looking  at the  dark doors
  and taking little heed of other things.'                                   
    Looking  out  from  the  porch   of  his   house  with   Gandalf  Theoden
  says:  'Not  long  now  shall  stand  the  high  hall  which  Brego  son of
  Brytta built' (cf. p. 435 and note 5; TT p. 120 'Brego  son of  Eorl'); and
  Gandalf tells him, as in TT, to send  for Eomer.  It was  at this  point in
  the  writing  of  the  chapter  that  there  entered   the  story   of  the
  imprisonment  of  Eomer  by   the  instigation   of  Wormtongue,   who  now
  receives  his  true  name:  Frana  (Grima  did not  replace this  till much
  later).                                                                    
    In  TT  when  Gandalf  spoke  to  Theoden  (p.  121)  'his voice  was low
  and  secret,  and none  save the  king heard  what he  said.' In  the early
  form of the chapter, however, this was not so:                             
                                                                            
  His voice was low and secret, and yet to those beside  him keen            
  and clear. Of Sauron he told,  and the  lady Galadriel,  and of            
  Elrond in Rivendell far away,  of the  Council and  the setting            
  forth of the Company of Nine, and all the perils of their road.            
  'Four only have come thus far,' he said. 'One is  lost, Boromir            
  prince  of Gondor.  Two were  captured, but  are free.  And two            
  have  gone  upon  a  dark Quest.  Look eastward,  Theoden! Into            
  the heart of menace they have gone: two small folk, such  as you            

 in Rohan deem but the matter of  children's tales.  Yet doom              
 hangs upon them. Our hope is with them - hope, if we can but              
 stand meanwhile!'                                                         
                                                                          
 There are several drafts for this passage preceding that in the  fair copy
 just given, and in one of these occurs the following:                     
                                                                          
 Of the Council and the setting forth of the Company of Nine. So           
 he came at last to the Mines of Moria and  the Battle  upon the           
 Bridge.                                                                   
   'Then  it  was  not  wholly  false,  the  rumour  that  Eomer           
 brought,' said Theoden.                                                   
   'No indeed,' said Aragorn, 'for he did but repeat what I said           
 to  him.  And  until  this time  yestermorning we  thought that           
 Gandalf had fallen. Even now he has not said what befell him in           
 Moria. We would gladly hear.'                                             
   'Nay,' said Gandalf. 'The sun is riding towards noon.'                  
                                                                          
 This is clear evidence that my father had reached this point, at least, in
 'The  King of  the Golden  Hall' before  he wrote  the conclusion  of 'The
 White Rider' in its later form: see p. 430.                               
   The passage just given is followed by a brief outline:                  
                                                                          
       Eomer  returns.  Wes  thu  Theoden  hal.  He  rejoices to  see Theoden
   so  much  better;  but  begs pardon  - save  only for  his advice  to ride
   west. Says how the day's delay has grieved him.                         
       Gandalf  continues  tale  and  holds  out  a  hope  (of  Frodo  in the
   East). But they must ride west.                                         
       Theoden  bids  them  stay  and  rest.  But  Gandalf won't  stay except
   for  food  ...  Theoden  has to  take heart  and send  every man  west. He
   himself is to lead his folk out of Eodoras into  the secret  refuge[?s] in
   the mountains - more defensible if all goes ill.                        
       Eomer   asks   that   Wormtongue  should   go  west   too.  Shadowfax.
   They set out. Gandalf fleets ahead.                                     
                                                                          
   As already mentioned, in the last third of the  chapter, from  the point
 where Legolas  gazes far  off and  believes that  he can  see 'a  glint of
 white' and 'a tiny tongue of flame' (TT p. 121),  there is  little further
 independent  drafting,  the  manuscript  in  ink  being  written  over the
 original pencilled text. But it is clear that the story as known  from The
 Two  Towers  of  the  unmasking  of  Wormtongue,  the   rehabilitation  of
 Eomer,   the   meal  before   departure,  the   gift  of   Shadowfax,  was
 achieved  almost  unhesitatingly.(16) In  an  important   respect,  however,
 my father at first conceived things differently.                          
   In  this  first  version of  'The King  of the  Golden Hall'  the Second
 Master of the Mark, slain in fighting at the River  Isen, is  Eofored, and

  he is  not Theoden's son  (p. 444  and note  12).(17) On  the other  hand, in
  addition  to  Eowyn  (Eomer's  sister,  p.  437;  addressed  by  Theoden as
  'sister-daughter',  p.  445), there  is another  lady in  close association
  with Theoden, Idis - his  daughter. All  through this  part of  the chapter
  she  is  present,  yet  never  once  does  she  speak.  When  Gandalf  asks
  Theoden who  shall rule  his people  in his  place when  he departs  to the
  war,  he  replies  that  Eowyn  'shall be  lady in  my stead';  and Gandalf
  says 'That is a good choice.' There  is no  mention of  Idis here;  yet she
  was still present, for at the  meal before  the riding  of the  host 'there
  also  waiting  upon  the  king  were  the  ladies,  Idis his  daughter, and
  Eowyn  sister  of  Eomer.'  It  was Eowyn  who brought  the wine,  and Idis
  is  again  not mentioned;  yet Hama  still says,  in response  to Theoden's
  words that Eomer is the last  of the  House of  Eorl (TT  p. 128):  'I said
  not  Eomer.  He  is  not  the  last.  There  are  Idis  your  daughter, and
  Eowyn  his sister.  They are  wise and  high-hearted.' But  it was  at this
  point that the brief existence of Idis came to an end;  for the  next words
  that  my  father  wrote were:  'All love  her. Let  her be  as lord  to the
  Eorlingas, while we are  gone.' All  references to  Idis were  then removed
  from the manuscript.                                                       
    I  cannot  say  what  function  in the  narrative my  father had  in mind
  for Idis (and it  is notable  that in  the original  outline, p.  437, only
  Eowyn  sister  of  Eomer  is  mentioned  as  waiting on  the guests  at the
  feast in Winseld after the  victory); still  less why  the daughter  of the
  King  (and  older  than  Eowyn,  p.  445)  should  be  so  silent   and  so
  overshadowed by the niece.                                                 
    The  significance  of  the  meeting of  Aragorn and  Eowyn, on  the other
  hand,  was  destined  to  survive,  though  fundamentally  transformed.  In
  this first version, in a passage already cited (p. 445), after she had gone
  'he stood still, looking at the dark doors and taking little heed  of other
  things'; at  the meal  before the  departure 'Aragorn  was silent,  but his
  eyes  followed  Eowyn'  (struck  out);  and  when she  brought the  wine to
  the  guests  'Long  she  looked  upon  Aragorn,  and  long  he  looked upon
  her'  -  for  which  was  substituted:  'As  she  stood before  Aragorn she
  paused  suddenly  and  looked  upon  him,  as  if  only  now  had  she seen
  him  clearly.  He  looked  down  upon her  fair face,  and their  eyes met.
  For  a moment  they stood  thus, and  their hands  met as  he took  the cup
  from  her.  "Hail  Aragorn  son   of  Arathorn!"   she  said.'   With  this
  contrast the passage that appears in its place  in TT  (p. 127).  And after
  Theoden's   words   'But   in   [Dunberg  >]   Dunharrow  the   people  may
  long defend themselves,  and if  the battle  go ill  thither will  come all
  who  escape'  (TT  p.  128) Aragorn  says: 'If  I live,  I will  come, Lady
  Eowyn,  and  then  maybe  we  will  ride  together.'  Then   Eowyn  'smiled
  and bent her head gravely.'                                                
    There is an isolated list of matters  'to be  explained before  the end',
  which in  view of  the first  item seems  to have  been written  just about
  this time. Only one other item is relevant here, but I give the whole list:

   Gandalf's escape - put this  at the  end of  XXVI [i.e.  'The White
   Rider']                                                            
   What happens to Bill (the pony)? [Added: Goes back  to Bree  and is
   found by Sam who rides him home.]                                  
 Bill Ferney.                                                         
 Bree and Merry's ponies.                                             
 Barnabas Butterbur [added: and the ponies).                          
 Galadriel.                                                           
 Ents. Treebeard. Entwives.                                           
 Aragorn   weds   Eowyn  sister   of  Eomer   (who  becomes   Lord  of
   Rohan) and becomes King of Gondor.                                 
 Feast in Gondor. Home Journey. They pass by round Lorien.(18)        
                                                                     
 But the story of Aragorn  and Eowyn  would in  the event,  of course,
 be quite otherwise; and in another short group of notes, isolated and
 undateable, this marital alliance  of Rohan  and Gondor  was rejected
 (and no other was foreseen):                                         
                                                                     
 ? Cut out the love-story  of Aragorn  and Eowyn.  Aragorn is  too old
 and  lordly  and  grim.  Make  Eowyn  the  twin-sister  of  Eomund, a
 stern amazon woman.                                                  
    If so, alter the message of Galadriel (XXVI.17).                  
    Probably Eowyn should die to avenge or save Theoden.              
                                                                     
 But my father added in a hasty scribble the possibility that Aragorn
 did indeed love Eowyn, and never wedded after her death.             
 The reference 'XXVI.17' is to the page in the 'fair copy' manuscript
 of 'The White Rider' where appears Galadriel's message to Aragorn
 delivered to him by Gandalf (p. 431):                                
      Elfstone, Elfstone, bearer of my green stone,                   
      In the south under snow a green stone thou shalt see.           
      Look well, Elfstone! In the shadow of the dark throne          
      Then the hour is at hand that long hath awaited thee.           
 The green stone in the south was borne on Theoden's brow (p. 444),
 beneath his white hair, and it was Eowyn who would stand in the      
 shadow of the dark throne within his hall.                           
                                                                     
                                 NOTES.                               
                                                                     
1.  Beginning  originally  at  'Gandalf now  wrapped himself  again in
    his old tattered  cloak' (p.  430; TT  p. 107),  the opening  of 'The
    King  of  the  Golden  Hall'  was  then  moved  to  'The  morning was
    bright and clear about them' (pp.  431 -  2; TT  p. 111).  The second
    rearrangement,  giving  the  form  in  TT, was  made after  'The King
    of the Golden Hall' was completed.                                

  2. Names  in  Theod-,  like  names  in  Eo-  (p.  403  note 5),  are not
     written with an accent at this time.                                
  3. In TT there are sixteen barrows at the  foot of  the hill  of Edoras,
     and it  is 500  years since  Eorl the  Young came  out of  the North.
     See note 11.                                                        
  4. The  flowers  on  the  burial  mounds, 'like  tiny snowdrops'  in the
     first  draft,  became  in  the  second  'tiny flowers  star-shaped and
     frail'. And  in the  second Legolas  says: 'Seven  mounds I  see, and
     seven  long lives  of men  it is,  since the  golden hall  was built.
     [Struck out at once:  And many  more lives  still since  the Rohiroth
     first passed into this land.]' It seems  curious that  such awareness
     of  the  history  of  the  Riders  of Rohan  should be  attributed to
     Legolas.                                                            
  5. 'Stay,  strangers unknown!  Who are  ye, friends  or foes,  that have
     come  thus  strangely clad  riding to  the gates  of this  town? None
     may  here  enter  in,  neither  beggarman  nor  warrior,  if  we know
     not  his name.  Now, ye  comers from  afar, declare  to us  in haste:
     what  are ye  called? What  is your  errand to  Theoden our  lord?' -
     My father first used the Old  English letter  'thorn' but  changed to
     'th' as he wrote.                                                   
       The  passage  in Beowulf  (lines 237  - 57)  in which  Beowulf and
     his  companions  are  accosted  by  the  watchman  on  the  coast  of
     Denmark  is  very  distinctly  echoed,  as  also  is  the  passage in
     Modern  English  in  TT,  p.  113  ('Who are  you that  come heedless
     over the plain...').                                                
  6. Conceivably  there  was  some  confusion  arising  from  the  initial
     idea  that  Gandalf  with  Gimli  entered   Eodoras  in   advance  of
     Aragorn  and  Legolas:  Gandalf  was  introduced  into the  scenes at
     the gates and the doors, but  Gimli, who  would play  little explicit
     part  in  them,  was  neglected.  'The  three  companions  went  for-
     ward' is certainly very surprising, since here the scene seems  to be
     expressly  visualised  without  Gimli;  but  this  may  have  been  a
     mere  slip,  deriving  from  the  frequent  use  of  'the  three com-
     panions' (Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli) in preceding chapters.       
  7. One of the  guards replies  that 'None  are welcome  here in  days of
     war  save  only  those  that  come   from  [struck   out:  Gemenburg]
     Heatorras  Giemen  Minas  Tirith',  with  Mundbeorg  written  in  the
     margin.  These  Old  English  words  are  gemen, giemen  'care, heed,
     watch';  Heatorras  'high  towers'; and  Mundbeorg 'protection-hill',
     distinct   from  Mundburg   in  LR.   Mundbeorg  occurs   in  another
     draft:  'And  I  am  Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn  ...  and  it  is  to
     Mundbeorg that I journey as to my  home' (cf.  TT p.  113, 'it  is to
     Mundburg that he goes').                                            
     An  echo  of  the  Old  English  poem  known  as  The  Wanderer, line
     92: Hwaer cwom mearg? Hwaer cwom mago?                                  
     It is perhaps possible that the 'Beowulfian'  reception at  the gates

      played some part in the increased hostility of Theoden before ever
      Wormtongue entered the story.                                       
  10. Two  small  details  in  the  scene  before  the  doors  may  be  men-
      tioned.  The  guards,  turning  their  sword-hilts towards  the stran-
      gers, cried Cumath her wilcuman! This was later changed to          
      Wesath  hale,  feorran  cumene,   which  appears   in  TT   (p.  114)
      translated, 'Hail, comers from afar!' And Gandalf speaks to         
      Aragorn   with  an   asperity  that   was  afterwards   softened  (TT
      p. 115):  Needless is  Theoden s  demand, but  needless also  is your
      refusal, Aragorn.'                                                  
  11. In LR the time-span was of course vastly greater: according to the
      Tale of Years Eorl the Young won the victory of the Field of        
      Celebrant  and  the  Rohirrim  settled   in  Calenardhon   (Rohan  as
      a  province  of  Gondor) in  the year  2510 of  the Third  Age, which
      was that number of years after the overthrow of Sauron by           
      Gilgalad  and  Elendil. With  the statement  here cf.  the genealogy.
      that  Aragorn  gives  of  himself at  the passage  of the  Pillars of
      the  Kings,  in which  he is  only separated  from Isildur  by three:
      (subsequently four) generations (pp. 360 - 1).                      
         It is difficult to explain the name 'Battle of the Field of      
      Gorgoroth:  on  the  First  Map  the  Battle  Plain  (Dagras,  later,
      Dagorlad)  is  placed  where  it  remained,  outside   the  mountain-
      fences  of  Mordor  and  separated  from   Gorgoroth  by   the  great
      pass, then named Kirith Ungo! (Map III, p. 309).                    
  12. Eofored  is  not named  as Theoden's  son. In  the outline  for this,
      chapter  the  Second Master  seems to  have been  slain in  the final
      battle of the River Isen, and his  funeral feast  was held  after the
      return  to  Eodoras  (pp.  435, 437).  His death  has now  been moved
      back to the fighting before Gandalf's arrival.                      
  13. Theoden here says that 'only a  few days  ago men  reported to  me .'
      that  Shadowfax  had  come  back  out  of  the  West; but  none could
      lay  hands  on  him,  for  he  went  away  swiftly  northwards.'  See
      p.  434  and  note  2. This  then became  'men reported  that Shadow-
      fax  had  been  seen  again,  running  wild  through  the  land'; and
      finally, as in TT, 'I heard that Shadowfax had come back riderless'.
  14. Wormtongue still says that 'to  the wonder  of us  all my  lord lent
      to  you  Shadowfax'.  This  was  subsequently  changed  to  his words
      in  TT:  'my  lord  bade  you  choose  any  horse  you  would  and be
      gone;  and  to  the  wonder  of  us  all you  took Shadowfax  in your
      insolence.'                                                         
  15. In the draft for this passage the reading is  'Go [struck  out: Eowyn
      and you too AElflaed Flaed] Idis and you too Eowyn'. Cf. the Old      
      English poetic word ides 'woman, lady'. In early notes Eowyn is     
      'daughter of Theoden' and 'daughter of Eomund' (p. 390).            
  16. Even to the names of Theoden's sword, Herugrim, and his horse>      
      Snowmane: only in the case of Dunharrow was there an earlier        

       form, Dunberg. Dunharrow is so named on Map IV, p. 319.            
  17.  In LR the genealogy is:                                            
                                                                         
                                    Thengel.                              
                                                                          
                                                                         
                      Theoden.  Theodwyn.  =  Eomund.                           
                                                                         
                      Theodred.   Eomer.       Eowyn.                               
                                                                         
           Near the end of the chapter 'Theodred' appears: ' "Behold I go
           forth," said Theoden. "[Struck out at once: Theodred my son] I
         have no son. I name Eomer my sister-son to be my heir" ' (cf. TT
         p. 127). On the other hand, in a second version of this passage,
             Theoden says: 'I have no child. Theodred my brother's son is
            slain.'
  18. To this last item in the list the following was added at some later
      time:
      No. They learn (in Rivendell?) that Nazgul razed Lorien and
      Keleborn fled with a remnant to Mirkwood. Galadriel was lost
      or was hidden. Or shall Lorien be left slowly to fade? Yes.
      Galadriel parts with Keleborn who elects to stay in the world
      and [?woods]. She is seen by Frodo in old age, when he and
      Sam see Galadriel and Bilbo (and Elrond? No - he has one
      [written above: 3?] [struck out: age] life of men still to rule in
        Rivendell).

                                APPENDIX ON RUNES.                               
                                                                               
 It  is notable  that all  references to  runes in  The Lord  of the  Rings were
 associated  with  Gandalf  until  my  father  came  to  the  words   graved  on
 Balin's  tomb  in  Moria.  In  The  Hobbit  runic  writing  is  almost entirely
 associated  with  Dwarves  (who  are  said,  in  Chapter  III  'A  Short Rest',
 to   have   invented   the  runic   Moon-letters),  but   runes  had   been  an
 element  in  Middle-earth from  a very  early stage.'  In his  letter to  G. E.
 Selby  of  14  December  1937,   cited  in   the  Foreword   to  Vol.   VI  The
 Return  of   the  Shadow,   my  father   said  that   he  preferred   his  own
 mythology  'with  its  consistent  nomenclature   and  organized   history'  to
 The   Hobbit,   and  spoke   with  humorous   disparagement  of   'this  rabble
 of   Eddaic-named   dwarves   out   of   Voluspa,   new-fangled   hobbits   and
 gollums  (invented  in  an  idle  hour)  and  Anglo-Saxon  runes.'  As  will be
 seen,  when  he  wrote  these  last  words  he  was thinking  of his  own runic
 alphabets,  already  at  that  time  highly  developed,  and  not  in  any  way
 particularly  associated  with  the  Dwarves,  if   associated  with   them  at
 all.  It  is  conceivable,  I  think,  that  it  was  nonetheless  Thror's Map,
 bearing  runic  writing  of  great  importance  in  the  story  of  The Hobbit,
 that  brought  that  close  association  into   being  (although   the  Dwarves
 always   remained  the   inheritors  and   not  the   first  devisers   of  the
 Angerthas).                                                                   
  There  seems   to  be   relatively  little   extant  writing   concerning  the
 runes  from  the  period  we  have  reached  in  this  book,  but  my  father's
 linguistic  papers  and  work  on  scripts  and  alphabets  were  left   in  so
 chaotic a state that it is  often impossible  to be  sure even  of a  broad and
 relative dating. A  central problem  lies, as  always in  this context,  in the
 existence  of  two  sets  of  variables.  The  richly divergent  development of
 scripts,   as   of  speech-sounds,   among  different   peoples  was   a  datum
 from  the  start;  but  the  detail  of  those   divergences  was   subject  to
 unceasing  modification  in  the  mind  of  their  deviser.  When   the  papers
 (almost  always  undated   and  often   without  consecutive   pagination)  are
 so  disordered  that  material  which  may  well  be  separated  by  decades is
 jumbled  together,  the  risk  is  great  of   false  conjunctions   and  false
 constructions.                                                                 
                                                                               
  ' The earliest runic document relating  to Middle-earth  that I  know of  is a
 little slip of paper in my father's early handwriting, headed Gondolinic Runes.
 This gives an alphabet  in which  the values  of the  runes are  almost totally
 different  from  the  Angerthas,  but  in  which  the  principles  of  phonetic
 organisation in relation to letter-shape are strongly evident.                 

 I give here first two  brief texts  that seem  to me  to come  most likely
 from  the period  shortly before  the beginning  of The  Lord of  the Rings
 more  or  less  contemporary  with  the   Quenta  Silmarillion   and  the
 Lhammas  given  in  Vol.  V,  The  Lost  Road  and  Other  Writings.  Both
 are clear manuscripts in ink, and  to both  of them  my father  later added
 in  pencil;  I  give  these  additions,  though I  suspect that  they were
 substantially  later. It  will be  seen that  these additions  concern the
 especial  importance  of  Runic  writing  among  the  Dwarves, of  which no
 mention is made in these texts as written.                               
                                                                         
                                    (i)                                   
                            The Elvish Alphabets.                         
                                                                         
 These   have   three   main   forms:  the   alphabets  of   Rumil,  of
 Feanor,  and  [of]  Dairon;  also called  the Valinorian,  Tunian, and
 Beleriandic letters.                                                     
   The  first  two  are  of  Noldorin  origin  and  ultimately related;
 the last is distinct and of Ilkorin origin.                              
                                                                         
   The  oldest  is  the  Alphabet  of  Rumil.  This  is  a   final  cursive
 elaboration  of  the  oldest  letters  of  the  Noldor  in  Valinor.  Only
 the  completion  and  arrangement   of  this   system  was   actually  due
 to   Rumil   of   Tuna;  its   author  or   authors  are   now  forgotten.
 Though  originating  in  Tuna  it  is   called  'Valinorian'   because  it
 was   mainly   used   for  writing   of  Qenya,   and  was   later  ousted
 from  use  among  the  Noldor  by  the  alphabet  of  Feanor.  It  is said
 still to be  used by  the Lindar  of Valinor;  but is  not in  general use
 among the Qendi.*                                                        
   The   Alphabet   of   Feanor   was   partly   derived  from   this,  and
 partly  devised  afresh  to  fit  a  different  system  of  writing  (from
 left to  right).  Its  actual  author  -  in  all  forms except  the later
 modifications   to   fit   the  changed   conditions  of   Noldorin  after
 the  Exile,  which  were   made  after   his  death   -  was   Feanor.  He
 constructed  it  both  as  a  general   phonetic  alphabet,   and  devised
 special   arrangements    to   fit    the   characteristics    of   Qenya,
 Noldorin,  and  Telerin.  This   alphabet  is   the  one   generally  used
 for Qenya, and for all purposes by the surviving Qendi.                  
                                                                         
   The   so-called   Alphabet   of   Dairon   was   in  origin   a  'runic'
 script  devised  for  inscriptions,  especially  on  wood,   that  origin-
 ated  among  the  Ilkorins.  It  is  usually  said   to  have   arisen  in
 Doriath,  and  it   certainly  there   developed  most   completely,  even
                                                                         
 (* With this passage cf. the Lhammas in Vol. V, pp. 173-4.)              

 producing a written form. But probably  its actual  invention was            
 due to the Danian elves of Ossiriand (who were ultimately of                 
 Noldorin  race).* The  name 'alphabet  of Dairon'  is due  to the            
 preservation in this script of  some fragments  of the  songs of            
 Dairon, the ill-fated minstrel of King Thingol of Doriath, in the            
 works on the ancient Beleriandic languages by Pengolod the                   
 Wise  of  Gondolin.  The  Noldor  did not  use this  script much,            
 even in Beleriand, though Pengolod cites cases of inscriptions at            
 Nargothrond and  Sirion's mouth  that are  in Noldorin  tongue.             
 [Added in pencil: But  this runic  alphabet spread  eastward from            
 Ossiriand to the Dwarves, and was largely used by them.)                     
                                                                             
                                      (ii)                                    
                                                                             
                            The 'Alphabet of Dairon'.                         
                                                                             
 The  Ilkorins  of Beleriand  devised an  alphabet of  'runes', or            
 angular letters used in inscriptions. This became widespread in              
 Beleriand, already before the exile of the Noldor of Valinor, and            
 showed various divergences in forms and  uses at  different times            
 and places. Its chief elaboration took place in Doriath, where a,            
 written  form  was  developed.  Owing to  the ruin  of Beleriand,            
 before  the departure  of the  Noldor to  Eressea, no  actual in-            
 scription  or  book in  this script  is now  preserved. Knowledge            
 of it [changed in pencil to: no actual Elvish inscription or book            
 in this script was preserved. Knowledge of its use by  the Elves]            
 is now preserved only in books  in Eressea  - in  the works  of '            
 Pengolod  of  Gondolin  upon   the  Beleriandic   languages,  and            
 other similar writings. Pengolod copied  and gave  extracts from,            
 various inscriptions and books that were still extant in his day.            
 Of  the books,  or written  form, his  principal source  was some            
 fragments of the songs  of King  Thingol's minstrel  Dairon. From            
 this fact is derived the [struck  out: erroneous]  name: Alphabet            
 of Dairon.                                                                   
   The origin of the script is probably to be placed  in Ossiriand            
 among the Danian elves, many of whom were incorporated in                    
 Doriath after the coming of Morgoth and the fall of their king,              
 Denethor.f- The Danian  elves were  ultimately of  Noldorin race,            
 and  inventions  of  this  sort  were a  special aptitude  of the            
                                                                             
 (*  On the Danian elves or Danas see especially V.176, 188 - 9.              
   + See the Quenta Silmarillion in Vol. V, p. 263.)                          

 Noldor.*   Moreover   a   related   alphabet  was   early  in   use  among
 the  eastern   branch  of   the  Danians,   beyond  the   Blue  Mountains,
 whence   it  also   spread  to   Men  in   those  regions,   becoming  the
 foundation  of  the  Taliskan  skirditaila   or  'runic   series'.  [Added
 in   pencil:   Related  alphabets   were  (>   A  related   alphabet  was)
 also   borrowed  (from   both  Men   and  Elves)   by  the   Dwarves;  the
 western   Dwarves   early   borrowed   and   adapted  the   full  inscrip-
 tional  'Alphabet  of  Dairon',  and  most  of  the  inscriptions  in this
 form  that  survived  the  Great   War  in   Eriador  and   elsewhere  are
 of  Dwarvish  origin,  though   their  language   is  seldom   the  secret
 tongue of the Dwarves.]                                                   
   This  alphabet  was  not  much  used  by  the  exiled  Noldor,   but  in
 certain  cases,  in   the  absence   of  parchment   or  for   carving  on
 wood,   or   where   as  at   Sirion's  mouth   they  were   mingled  with
 Ilkorins,   they   employed   these  letters   during  their   exile,  and
 modified  their  forms  or   applications  to  fit  their   own  language.
 Pengolod   gives   some   examples   of   this   Noldorin   usage.  [Added
 in  pencil:  The  greatest   elaboration  was   reached  in   Eregion  and
 Moria,  where  during  the  Second   Age  Elves   and  Dwarves   lived  in
 harmony.   This   later   form   was   called   the   'Runes   of  Moria',
 because   it  remained   long  in   use  among   the  Dwarves,   and  most
 of   the   inscriptions   employing   it   survived   in  the   halls  and
 chambers of Moria.]                                                       
                                                                          
   With this view of  the origin  of the  name Alphabet  of Dairon  cf. The
 Lord  of  the  Rings  Appendix  E  (II): 'Their  richest and  most ordered
 form was known as the  Alphabet of  Daeron, since  in Elvish  tradition it
 was  said  to have  been devised  by Daeron,  the minstrel  and loremaster
 of King Thingol of Doriath.'                                              
   The  reference  to  Taliska  (for  which  see  V.179,  191,   196:  'the
 language of the three houses of Beor, of  Haleth, and  of Hador')  is very
 interesting   as  adumbrating   a  relationship   between  the   runes  of
 Beleriand  and  the  ancient  Germanic  runes;  cf.  V.279  on  the 'Indo-
 European' word  widris 'wisdom'  in the  ancient tongue  of the  people of
 Beor.  It  seems  clear that  the second  element of  Taliskan skirditaila
 'runic series' is to be  understood as  an ancestral  cognate of  the word
 seen in Old English teal (with  a sense  'number, reckoning,  series'; Old
 Norse tal, etc., and cf. Modern English tale, tell); the first element may
 perhaps  be  connected with  the Germanic  stem sker-,  seen in  Old Norse
 skera  'cut,  carve',  Old  English  sceran  (Modern  English   shear,  cf.
 ultimately related shard, potsherd).                                       
   Detailed  exposition  from  this time  of the  ancient Elvish  runes seems
 (* Cf. the Ainulindale' in Vol. V, p. 162.)                              

  to be restricted to a series of five  manuscript pages  - which  are indeed
  extremely  informative.  In style  and bearing  they seem  to me  to belong
  with  substantial  work   on  Noldorin   phonology  that   certainly  comes
  from  the  time not  long preceding  the start  of The  Lord of  the Rings.
  Since it would be extremely difficult to print these pages  as part  of the
  text,  and  since  they  would  be unclear  in facsimile  reproduction (and
  require  a  lot  of  unnecessary  explanation   and  annotation),   I  have
  rewritten and redrawn them  as a  series of  plates, numbered  I to  IV, at
  the  end of  this Appendix.  I have  attempted to  remain very  faithful to
  the originals, and have  only edited  them in  a few  minor points  that in
  no  way  alter  their  purport;  I have  not attempted  to smooth  away the
  various inconsistencies  of presentation.  There are  a very  few pencilled
  changes  that  are  ignored.  At  the  head  of the  first sheet  my father
  wrote:  'All  this  has  been  revised  and  rewritten.  See  Appendices to
  Lord of the Rings.'                                                        
    On  plate  V  I  reproduce  a separate  manuscript leaf  entitled 'Dwarf-
  runes  for  writing English  (phonetic)', which  I shall  refer to  in this
  Appendix as 'E'. This  is obviously  quite distinct  from the  other pages,
  but it will  be found  that it  agrees well  on the  whole with  'the later
  Noldorin  use'  on  plate  II  (referred  to  subsequently as  'N'), though
  there  is  some  difference  in the  application of  signs, notably  in the
  nasals and in those representing English s (sh), z (as in vision), ts (ch),
  and dz (j as twice in judge), which  are either  used for  different sounds
  in N  or not  found there.  As will  be seen  shortly, this  page evidently
  dates  from  the  time  of  my  father's  return  to  the  Moria  story, as
  described  in  this  book. Curiously,  kw (qu)  is absent  from E,  and the
  rune V for  kw in  the Doriath  and Noldorin  usage is  there given  to ts
  (ch). In E, also, h is represented by C, but by > in the others.           
                                                                            
    At the bottom  of plate  V I  have transcribed  the runic  inscription on
  Balin's tomb from the end  of the  original first  'Moria' chapter  in Vol.
  VI (see p. 460 and note  40). As  noted there,  it was  at that  point that
  my  father  decided  to use  the Runes  of Beleriand  in preference  to Old
  English runes, for he first wrote the inscription in the latter but at once
  wrote it in the former as  well -  in two  forms, which  I have  marked (i)
  and  (ii).  The  words  Runes  of  Dwarves  on  the  same page  (VI.460) no
  doubt  have  some  significance  in  this  connection;  cf.  also  Gandalf's
  words  in  the  second  version  of the  chapter ('The  Lord of  Moria', p.
  186): 'These are dwarf-runes,  such as  they use  in the  North.' -  On the
  name Burin of Balin's father see VI.444.                                   
    Version  (i)  of  the  tomb-inscription  agrees  with E  (and with  N) in
  every point save one: the use of the rune >  for s  in son  instead of ...
  In E > is used for the vowel [...] (as in English  cup); while  in N  it is
  used for h.                                                                
    Version (ii) agrees with (i) in the s-rune, but reverses o and o  in lord
  and Moria, and for l  in lord  substitutes (...) for (...): the former  is found

  in  the  Doriath  and  Noldorin  use.  Here  the  rune  (..) is used  for the
  vowel in son, where (i) has the  unphonetic V (o).  In E  this rune  has the
  value ai, in N the value ae (later changed in pencil to ai in a  reversal of
  the values ai and ae).                                                       
    The  next  (third)  version  of the  tomb-inscription, at  the end  of the
  second  version  ('The  Lord  of  Moria')  of  the  chapter,  is hidden  by a
  fourth  version pasted  over it;  but Taum  Santoski has  been able  to read
  the underlying  inscription  by  lighting  the  page  from  the  back.  With
  Fundin  for  Burin  (see  VI.444)  the  runic  writing  thus   recovered  is
  almost  as  in  version  (i),  with  the  same  use  of  >  for s;  but very
  curiously this  same rune  is used  for o  in both  occurrences of  the word
  of, although V' for  o appears  in son,  lord, and  Moria. In  addition, the
  Dwarvish    words    Balin    Fundinul    Uzbad    Khazaddumu    are   added
  beneath,  the  rune  for (..) being  apparently (..), which  is  s in  all the
  alphabets given here.                                                       
    The fourth version of  the inscription,  that pasted  over the  third, and
  the fifth, at the end of the typescript text that followed, are identical in
  all forms; the latter is  reproduced on  p. 186.  So far  as the  brief text
  goes,  agreement  with  E  is  here  complete,  with s  represented by (..), z
  represented  by (..),  and (..) used for  the vowel  [ .. ], which  here appears
  in the word son, treated phonetically.                                      
                                                                             
    On  plate  VI  I  have  redrawn the  runic writing  from the  two earliest
  illustrations   of   a   burnt  and   blackened  page   from  the   Book  of
  Mazarbul.  These  redrawings  are  intended  to  show  the  runes  and their
  relative placing and nothing more.  The earliest  form (i)  is found  on the
  back of the last page  of the  original 'Moria'  chapter (see  VI.460, 467).
  This is  the merest  sketch, an  indication of  what might  be done  in this
  direction: it was  made very  hastily, scribbled  down, with  little attempt
  at  verisimilitude, the  illegible parts  of the  page being  represented by
  rough  scribbled  strokes   (and  the   number  of   missing  lines   in  my
  redrawing  is   approximate  and   impressionistic).  The   right-hand  bot-
  tom  corner  is  shown as  a triangular  detached piece,  on which  only the
  word  Kazaddum  is  written.   The  second   form  (ii)   is  a   much  more
  developed  representation  of  the  slashed  and  discoloured leaf,  done in
  pencil  and  coloured  chalks;  here  again  the bottom  corner is  shown as
  torn right  off.  (The  evolution of  this page  is emblematic  in miniature
  of  my  father's mode  of work:  the evolution  of the  details of  shape is
  progressive  and  continuous.  In this  second version  there are  two holes
  on the right hand side of the page and a bite out of the  top; in  the third
  and  fourth  versions  these  remain,  but  the   bottom  corner   is  added
  back,  with  a  triangular indentation  above, continuing  into the  page as
  a  black  line.  In  the  final  form, reproduced  in Pictures  by J.  R. R.
  Tolkien no. 23, the  central hole  is enlarged  and moved  to the  left, but
  the  black  line  remains  where  the  bottom  corner  was  originally shown
  as torn off and separate.)                                                   

   The words of the original sketch have been given in VI.467, but I            
 repeat them here in phonetic form:                                             
                                                                               
    1. We drouv aut the orks fro[m].... gard.                                    
    2.  ... [f]irst  hol. Wi  slu meni  ~ndr the  brait s~n.                      
    3. in the deil. Floi woz kild bai ~n arou....                                
    4.   Wi did ..........                                                       
    9. Wi ha[v] okjupaid the twentif~rst hol ov.                                 
   10. norp end. Der dr iz..........                                              
   11. ............ saft iz..........                                            
   12. [B]alin haz set ~p hiz tser in the tseimbr ov Mazar.                      
   13. bul......................Balin iz lord ov.                                
                                                                               
   14. Moria..........                                                           
   18. Balin..........                                                           
   20.                        Kazaddum.                                          
                                                                               
   Here  there is  close but  not complete  agreement with  E. The  s-rune is
 (..) not >, the latter being used for [ ~ ], as in E;  but there  is divergence
 in the w-rune, which is here (..), to which  E gives  the value  dz (j)  and N
 the value gw. The short single vertical used  in E  as abbreviation  for the
 when in the upper  position and  as a  sign for  the vowel  [e] when  in the
 lower  position  is here  used for  the in  the lower  position, but  in the
 upper  position  for  h  (in  have, has,  his): in  both occurrences  of the
 word  hall  the  stroke  stands  in the  lower position,  but this  may have
 been  no  more  than  an  inadvertence, for  the runes  in this  sketch were
 pencilled  very  rapidly  and  several  were  written  erroneously  and then
 corrected. The rune  for the  initial consonants  [s] in  shaft and  [ts] in
 chair,  chamber  also differ  in their  values from  those ascribed  to them
 in E. The use of the m-rune  for v  in we  have occupied  (line 9)  can only
 be a slip. Lastly, the vowel [ ~ ] is employed  not only  in under,  sun, up
 but also in an (arrow) and in first (at the second occurrence).                
                                                                               
   Comparison  with  E  will  show  that  the  second  version  of  the  page
 from  the  Book  of  Mazarbul  agrees  with  it in  every point  and detail.
 The  different  form  of  the  I-rune in  Floi (line  4), with  the crossing
 stroke falling, not rising, to the right, is probably merely  accidental (in
 the third version the shape is normal at this point).                          
   To  this  version  my father  appended a  phonetic transcription.  In this
 he interpreted oukn in line 6 as ?broken, it at the end  of line  10 as?its,
 and the word before helm in line  17 as  (?sil)vr, though  the last  rune is
 very clearly n, not r (in the third version an r-rune is written here).        
                                                                               
   The  sequence  of   development  in   this  much-considered   passage  was
 very  probably  as  follows.  The  original  form of  the text  that Gandalf
 first  read  out  from  the  Book  of Mazarbul  seems to  have been  that of
 the earliest drawing of the page itself (plate VI, i). Closely related to it
 is the form  in the  original pencilled  narrative of  the scene,  which can
 be largely made out beneath the text  written over  it in  ink (see  pp. 191

  and  205  note  4).  Both forms  had the  Orcs for  Orcs and  Balin's chair
  for  Balin's  seat;  but  the  original  narrative text  had we  have found
  truesilver,  well-forged,  and (To)morrow  Oin is...  lead... seek  for the
  upp(er)  armoury  of  the  Third  Deep,  all  of which  is absent  from the
  first drawing of the page.                                                  
    The overwritten text in the first narrative,  which is  given on  p. 191,
  is effectively  the same  as the  text in  the second  drawing of  the page
  (plate VI, ii).                                                            
    The third drawing of the  page (which  is otherwise  very similar  to the
  second,  and  employs  exactly  the  same  runic  system)   corresponds  to
  the text of the fair copy  manuscript of  'The Mines  of Moria  (ii)' given
  on pp. 200 - 1.                                                            
    It is plain therefore that the first three drawings of this page from the
  Book of  Mazarbul all  belong to  the same  time, and  relate step  by step
  to the rewriting of this passage through the original draft and  first fair
  copy of the narrative chapter; and that the  runic alphabet  set out  in E,
  'Dwarfrunes  for writing  English' (plate  V), belongs  to this  time also.
  But when the fourth  version of  this page  was done  the runic  values had
  changed.                                                                   
    The  first  drawings  of   the  other   two  pages   from  the   Book  of
  Mazarbul (that written by Ori in  Elvish script  and the  last page  of the
  book,  in  runes)  belong  with  and  were  done  at the  same time  as the
  third drawing of the first page; for the texts see pp. 200 - 1.            
